Sources close to President Cyril Ramaphosa "are optimistic" about Friday's crucial meeting with DA leader John Steenhuisen. Although the government of national unity (GNU) negotiations between the DA and ANC hit another roadblock this week, Friday's meeting could seal the deal. The tug of war between the DA and the ANC has led to Ramaphosa delaying his all-important Cabinet announcement. A crucial meeting between ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa and DA leader John Steenhuisen on Friday afternoon could see both parties finding each other after the government of national unity (GNU) negotiations hit another brick wall this week. Steenhuisen confirmed to News24 that talks were ongoing despite the tug of war between the ANC and DA over Cabinet positions. "The negotiations are ongoing. It is a process, and the DA is committed to finding a fair deal that leads to a stable government in which the DA can play a meaningful role," he said. ANC insiders close to Ramaphosa believe that the "power-hungry" DA is expected to swallow its pride and take the president's offer if it wants Cabinet positions. READ | COALITION NATION: Ramaphosa's scathing 'Dear John' letter to Steenhuisen Despite reports that the talks to form a GNU had collapsed after a war of words between Ramaphosa and Steenhuisen, the president will again present his final offer to the DA before making his announcement. A source close to Ramaphosa told News24 that it is unlikely that the DA will walk away because "they want power." The DA is also said to be so desperate that it does not want to see itself back in the opposition benches. Another person close to the president expressed optimism that a deal will be found saying: "No one is walking away from anybody. Ultimately, this is about the country and not individual preferences." President @CyrilRamaphosa has called a Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) for the Opening of Parliament and the President’s delivery of the Opening of Parliament Address. https://t.co/Bt4oFHGWxS — The Presidency ???? (@PresidencyZA) June 28, 2024 On Thursday, News24 reported that Ramaphosa, who is an experienced negotiator, wrote a scathing letter to Steenhuisen, accusing him of "moving the goalposts" in negotiations with the ANC and wanting to set up an illegal "parallel government", which would operate outside the parameters of the Constitution. The leaked letter, dated 25 June, has been making the rounds on social media. This was after negotiations to form a GNU hit another major hurdle this week, with tension between the ANC and the DA again deepening after the DA demanded two more Cabinet posts. The letter was written after the ANC had made a final offer of six Cabinet posts. The DA then demanded two further posts, which News24 understands has angered Ramaphosa and ANC negotiators. Ramaphosa then opted to withdraw a crucial post – trade and industry – from the initial offer to the DA, in response to the DA's earlier comeback. His letter to Steenhuisen, in his capacity as ANC president, begins by admonishing the opposition leader for insisting on conducting negotiations through written correspondence. READ | COALITION NATION: DA to tell Ramaphosa the deal is off unless he sticks to original offer Ramaphosa, who is clearly now exasperated, held nothing back by reminding the DA that the ANC was also talking to other parties to form the GNU. He said he found a letter of demand by the DA's federal executive council chairperson, Helen Zille, to be "offensive, condescending, and inconsistent with the Constitution". The president accused Steenhuisen of shifting the goalposts after the ANC presented a final offer of six key Cabinet portfolios, and the DA came back demanding eight. He then rounded on the DA and accused the party of wanting to set up a "parallel government", a move that would be illegal. "In its recent proposals, I believe the DA has jeopardised the foundation of setting up a government of national unity by moving the goalposts in your letter of 24 June 2024 to me." He added: I am truly taken aback by how you now want two more portfolios to bring the DA's portfolios to eight. You have said that you would like new portfolios to be allocated to the DA out of the options of Sports, Arts and Culture, Agriculture, Rural Development and Land Reform, or Public Service and Administration. Ramaphosa then told Steenhuisen that: "You go on to say that you are certain that assigning two additional portfolios to the DA, which would take your quantum and cabinet from six to eight, would satisfy clause 16 of the statement of intent by better reflecting the will of the people as expressed in the electoral outcomes, while also taking into account the national interest." In his strongly worded letter, Ramaphosa also made it clear that: "I also prefer not to deal further with the legally incompetent proposals to unilaterally redetermine contractual arrangements of directors general and other contracts. "I did inform you that I felt we should not dwell on the misguided propositions contained in that letter as paying attention to the contents of that letter would divert us from the task at hand of constituting a government of national unity." READ | COALITION NATION: 'Take it or leave it' - Ramaphosa presents final offers to GNU partners Meanwhile, Ramaphosa has called for a joint sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces for his Opening of Parliament Address on 18 July. The sitting will see Ramaphosa outline his priorities for the seventh administration. As discussions to form a GNU continue, South Africa is eagerly waiting for Ramaphosa to announce his Cabinet colleagues.