ActionSA has suspended two of its senior members in KwaZulu-Natal amid charges of vehicle abuse. Party chief whip in the Newcastle Municipality, Mzwakhe Mbatha, and sub-regional chairperson Sizwe Mokoena were suspended. The party is also launching an investigation and disciplinary process for both men. ActionSA has suspended two senior members of the Newcastle Municipality in KwaZulu-Natal, who have been at loggerheads over the alleged abuse of a municipal vehicle. "They are suspended from the party pending the outcomes of ongoing investigations and disciplinary processes," ActionSA provincial chairperson Zwakele Mncwango said on Monday. The allegations surround controversial municipality chief whip and ActionSA councillor Mzwakhe Mbatha, whose driver ActionSA Osizweni sub-region chairperson Sizwe Mokoena was suspended over the alleged abuse of the municipal vehicle. Within party structures, Mokoena outranks Mbatha. In his defence, Mokoena said Mbatha would use the vehicle for his personal activities and would also pick up women. READ | Chief whip vs bodyguard: ActionSA leaders accuse each other of using municipal car to 'pick up women' He claimed that he was being blamed for Mbatha's personal use of the vehicle. Mbatha denied this, saying Mokoena was simply bad at his job and was attempting to shift blame onto him. He also accused Mokoena of using a municipal vehicle to go to nightclubs. Mncwango said any breach of the party code of conduct was escalated to the Ethics and Disciplinary Committee. "They are empowered to investigate and hold hearings related to any alleged breach of the party's code of conduct. Thus, ActionSA can confirm that these due processes are under way." Mncwango said the party took the matter seriously and aimed to expedite investigations "to bring the matter to finality, ensuring all allegations are fully ventilated". "We intend to hold accountable any individuals found to have acted outside the party's code of conduct. With due regard to the media reports highlighting the seriousness of the matter, ActionSA will communicate any further updates." Previous allegations against Mbatha This is not the first time Mbatha has been in the spotlight. He was previously accused of attempting to take advantage of an ActionSA female member who helped him campaign in 2023. She accused him of sexual harassment after he allegedly demanded she remove her shirt. READ | I rushed out of the car 'bare-breasted': Suspension process initiated for ActionSA councillor The woman claimed after a party launch on 26 August 2023, Mbatha - after a couple of drinks - was unhappy that she and her sister wanted to leave. She claimed Mbatha then held on to her ActionSA T-shirt, demanding she take it off or leave the car. She said she then took it off, got out of the car, and fled bare-breasted into a dark street at 22:00.