Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi has been elected chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. ActionSA’s Athol Trollip has taken issue with Zibi’s election, arguing that it's wrong given that Rise Mzansi is part of the government of national unity. Trollip was at one stage being considered for the position. Last-minute changes to committees sparked tension between ActionSA and political newcomer Rise Msanzi over one of the most powerful parliamentary positions. On Wednesday, several parliamentary committees elected their chairpersons for the next five years. There were some surprises regarding who ultimately took the chairperson's seat in several committees after the ANC and several opposition parties negotiated new positions. While MPs in almost all committees were satisfied with the designated committee chairpersons, it was in the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) where tensions were clearly visible. Since last week, it was just about final that ActionSA’s Athol Trollip would be elected Scopa chairperson. Several sources told News24 that ActionSA, which is not part of the government of national unity (GNU), was likely to take up the position of Scopa chairperson. The position would have gone to Trollip, the party’s leader in Parliament, in line with opposition parties traditionally holding the post. READ | Major change for Parliament on cards as GNU parties expected to share committee chairs On Tuesday, shortly after a House sitting, Trollip seemed positive about the talks with the ANC. "It is up to the ANC now," he told News24. But come Wednesday afternoon - after last-minute deliberations about positions in Parliament’s 30 committees - Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi was elected Scopa chairperson. ActionSA’s main bone of contention was that Rise Mzansi is part of the GNU. He was nominated by ANC MP Lusizo Makhubela, and DA MP Patrick George Atkinson seconded his nomination. While there were no other candidates put forward, the EFF’s Veronica Mente, a long-standing member of Scopa, objected to Zibi's nomination. But Zibi was eventually elected. "I look forward to working with all the members of all the political parties that are represented in Scopa. I think people look particularly to this committee to see the work of Parliament being done. "As much as my role is here, I am also the servant, not just of the members of the committee but also of the South African people. It is an honour and a privilege," Zibi said after his election. Minutes after Zibi’s short speech, Trollip arrived. He took his seat and immediately wanted to know why the meeting started late. [MEDIA STATEMENT] RISE Mzansi congratulates Leader, @SongezoZibi on hiselection as SCOPA Chairperson - by RISE Mzansi National Assembly Caucus Whip, @Makashule #RISEMzansi#ForThePeopleByThePeople #RISEinParliament #7thParliament pic.twitter.com/gC3CDBfQRW — RISE Mzansi (@Rise_Mzansi) July 10, 2024 Trollip was not impressed with Zibi's election and seemed highly irritated. The committee secretary said that all members were informed of the meeting time via SMS. Technically, it was not possible for Trollip to be elected as he is an alternate member of Scopa. Alternate members cannot be appointed as committee chairpersons as they are full-time positions. News24 understands that this gave rise to the last-minute changes to Scopa committees. Later, in a statement, Trollip expressed concern about Zibi’s appointment. "ActionSA is concerned though not surprised by the manifestly parochial appointment by the multi-party government of the chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) to a signatory party to the ‘statement of intent’ of the multi-party government, thereby breaking the established and objective convention that the Scopa is chaired by a member of an opposition party. "The election of Rise Mzansi's Songezo Zibi MP as chairperson of Scopa marks a troubling departure from our own National Assembly and international best practice. The multi-party government now clearly wishes to exercise oversight over itself by deploying one of its own to head up this critical oversight committee," he said. Maimane was also in the running for Scopa chairperson at one stage, but he was since appointed as chairperson of the Appropriations Committee.