ActionSA wants to know how it can hold corruption-accused Zizi Kodwa accountable. Kodwa, who is back in Parliament, is accused of receiving R1.6 million in bribes. ActionSA will also be part of the EFF's motion to revisit Cyril Ramaphosa's Phala Phala saga. As South Africa readies itself for the official opening of the seventh Parliament on Thursday, ActionSA's Athol Trollip has vowed to "shake the ethics tree" until ethics emerges from Parliament. The party's top agenda item deals with former sports minister and corruption-accused Zizi Kodwa's return to Parliament. Trollip told News24 that at least three letters had already been sent to the ethics committee, to enquire as to what steps they could take to hold Kodwa accountable. Kodwa is accused of receiving R1.6 million in bribes. He was arrested in early June, but later sworn in as a Member of Parliament. "We are going to shake that ethics tree until ethics comes out in Parliament. Because one of our core values in ActionSA is that we believe in ethical leadership... if Parliament does not want to do it, we are going to push them hard until somebody pulls out a stick about ethics because there is a conundrum," Trollip said. READ | 'I'm not a judge': Hlophe says there's 'no conflict' in him serving on JSC, praises 'genius' Zuma He said one such conundrum was John Hlophe's appointment to the Judicial Service Commission. ''Judge [John] Hlophe's appointment to the Judicial Service Commission is a conundrum because nothing prevents him from serving as a Member of Parliament, despite having been impeached. There are only two provisions: if you are guilty of an offence, you get a sentence of more than a year without the option of a fine, and if you are unrehabilitated insolvent. "We need to fix that. Parliament has made a commitment they are going to do that, and we are going to push hard on that," Trollip said. He said President Cyril Ramaphosa's Phala Phala saga would also not be exempt, with ActionSA planning to be part of the EFF's motion to revisit the matter. It involves US$580 000 stuffed into a couch at Ramaphosa's private farm, Phala Phala. Trollip said: Phala Phala is on the agenda. It's already put forward as a motion by the EFF, and we are going to be part of that motion. If the president has broken any rules around foreign exchange control, holding foreign currency undeclared, and not declaring the theft on his farm, he must answer for it because any infraction, small or big, around corruption, needs to be prosecuted. "Cyril Ramaphosa is leading a government, and the [government of national unity] will not hold him to account... he can count on ActionSA to hold him to account," Trollip added.