All parties in the GNU's manifestos are being considered in drafting the government's plan of action. The National Development Plan will serve as "filter" for policy positions. Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni described the Cabinet as "apolitical". The manifestos of all parties in the government of national unity (GNU) will be considered in setting the government's priorities and programme of action, said Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni. On Thursday, the day after members of the executive were sworn in, and their appointments thus came into effect, Ntshavheni briefed the media, and stressed that Cabinet decisions were collective decisions. She also sought to draw a clear line between parties and the government. Ntshavheni said: As we go into Cabinet, we are not carrying a party card. We are carrying a government cap. "If you remember the oath of office, we took it, and we committed to serving the Republic," said Ntshavheni, her right hand raised like when taking an oath. "Our priority is South Africa, but not the political parties we are coming from." She added: As we enter Cabinet, we take off the political party cap. We are the government of the Republic of South Africa and we govern for all. For those who elected us and for those who did not elect us. She said the executive was "fully apolitical". But this might come as news to the DA's social media admin. On Thursday, it posted twice on X to congratulate "DA ministers" for their first acts in office. New Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure, the DA's Dean Macpherson @DeanMacpherson, announced that government may only use existing properties for politicians, and no new offices or houses may be procured. This decision will save and protect public money. pic.twitter.com/Up1an493cX — Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) July 4, 2024 The DA recognises the bold decision by new Home Affairs Minister, Dr Leon Schreiber @Leon_Schreib, to extend temporary visas for foreign nationals waiting for visa approvals. This decision will reduce the 145 000 visa backlog. Read more: https://t.co/ecdFtd6YyA pic.twitter.com/F3jzkjqEur — Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) July 4, 2024 Home Affairs Minister Leon Schreiber announced an extension of temporary visa concessions for foreign nationals in South Africa who are still awaiting the outcome of their visa, waiver and appeal applications due to processing delays And Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Dean Macpherson announced that his department would not procure any new houses or offices for the executive, or do any renovations. Several of the former opposition parties, which now form part of the GNU, have indicated that they intend to use their seat at the Cabinet table to raise their policy positions. READ | Large, expensive GNU Cabinet the result of electorate's choice, says Ntshavheni Ntshavheni, however, said ministers could not "expropriate" Cabinet's policies for themselves. She added: Whoever said 'this is the policy I'm going to implement'. No. Whoever said 'this is the priority I'm going to implement’. Ntshavheni referred to Ramaphosa's statement on Sunday evening, when he announced the executive, and said that "the GNU would be bound by certain fundamental principles and would undertake a basic minimum programme of priorities as articulated in the statement of intent" – which is the document that the GNU parties signed. The president, as the head of the national executive, exercises the executive authority of the Republic, "together with" the other members of the Cabinet, in term of section 85(2) of the Constitution, said Ntshavheni. "The phrase of 'as the head of the Cabinet' captures the idea of collective responsibility, but it also allows the Cabinet and the president to determine the way and procedures by which they work together, including leaving certain matters or kinds of matters to be dealt with by a single member of the Cabinet," Ntshavheni. "Therefore, if a matter is not a routine, departmentally specific matter or function, it must first be referred to the Cabinet, as must all matters that the Cabinet itself has decided should come to it. In general, if a matter is not routine, it must be referred to the Cabinet for its consideration by way of a Cabinet memorandum." READ|'Existing government policies remain in effect without exception': ANC clarifies GNU policy She emphasised that the president and ministers were duty-bound to take matters of policy and significant decisions - for instance, those with financial implications beyond a department's approved budget - and any matter the Cabinet had decided should be referred to Cabinet. "Failure to do so could undermine the validity of such a decision," said Ntshavheni. The government's priorities and programme of action are articulated in the Medium-Term Strategic Framework (MTSF). Ntshavheni said this was guided by the election manifesto of the governing party - and, in the case of the GNU, governing parties. At the moment, there is no MTSF, as the Sixth Administration has come to an end. She said that, to give effect to the statement of intent, the Forum of South Africa Directors-General, which the director-general chairs in the Presidency, has undertaken the work of analysing the manifestos of GNU parties, and will submit a proposal for consideration and adoption at the Cabinet Lekgotla scheduled for next Thursday and July 2024. This will be the programme of government that will be collectively implemented. Ramaphosa will then base his Opening of Parliament Address on 18 July on this MTSF. READ | GNU executive a fresh start, says Ramaphosa as ministers vow to rise above petty politics Ntshavheni said the National Development Plan, adopted in 2012, will be used as the "filter" for policy proposals. "If it is not helping to achieve these goals, it is out." Ntshavheni wasn't concerned that different policy positions could create a deadlock in the Cabinet. She said in the previous term – in which she also served in the Cabinet – they at times "very vehemently differed" on issues, but a solution was always found. She said that, if she divulged on which issues they differed vehemently, she would be fired before she got back to her office in Pretoria. "We have not anticipated any deadlock, because the mechanisms for resolving deadlock are in place," she said. Ntshavheni added that Ramaphosa "has demonstrated his ability to negotiate" and has "outstanding skill at negotiating and reconciling different views". "And, as the head of that Cabinet, he is going to make sure that Cabinet functions."