The first judge and the first Chapter 9 head to be removed are now both "honourable members" of the very National Assembly that voted to remove them - and this makes the case for electoral reform, argues parliamentary reporter Jan Gerber. The irony was hanging thick in Parliament's Good Hope Chamber on Tuesday, when the MK Party's MPs were being sworn in. Here, we had the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, John Hlophe, who was sworn in as a member of the same institution – the National Assembly – that overwhelmingly voted to remove him. He won't be an ordinary MP, he'll be the leader of the opposition, a position so significant that the Constitution recognises it. He was removed following the Judicial Service Commission's (JSC) finding that he was guilty of gross misconduct after he tried to sway Constitutional Court judges to rule in corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma's favour, the same Jacob Zuma who is MKP's leader. Given its significant representation in the National Assembly, the MKP will most likely have representation on the JSC. Speaking to journalists after the swearing-in proceedings, Hlophe said the party had not discussed deployments yet, so he couldn't say whether he would represent the party on the JSC. Tellingly, he didn't rule it out. So, there is a distinct possibility that the first judge to be removed, for gross misconduct, could be on the body appointing judges. He could also serve on the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services, which recommended to the National Assembly that he should be removed. Furthermore, the MKP MPs swore to uphold, obey and protect the Constitution. The party's stated objective is to abolish constitutional supremacy. However, Hlophe told the media that the party's attempts to "Africanise" the law would be within the constitutional bounds. We were spared the irony of Hlophe being sworn in by Acting Judge President of the Western Cape Patricia Goliath. Goliath took this position after Ramaphosa suspended Hlophe, and with whom Hlophe had an acrimonious relationship. The "small JSC" – the JSC without politicians – last year dismissed Hlophe's racism complaint against Goliath, and decided that he should face another impeachment investigation over Goliath's accusations that he had used abusive language towards her and had assaulted Judge Mushtak Parker, allegedly because he believed that Parker was making advances on his now former wife, Judge Gayaat Salie. READ | MK Party MPs: From disgraced judge who wants to 'Africanise' law, to Gupta-linked 'Weekend Special' Hlophe was sworn in by National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza, as he was not on the MKP original list to Parliament. Hlophe is, of course, not the first office bearer, who went from being impeached by the National Assembly to being an "honourable member" of this very House. The trailblazer was Busisiwe Mkhwebane - who, just more than a month after the National Assembly, with the required two-thirds majority, voted to remove her as Public Protector due to misconduct and incompetence, announced that she had joined the EFF. Hardly a week later, she was sworn in as an MP of the party, skipping the queue of longtime members. She subsequently served on the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services, meaning she had oversight over the Public Protector, despite being removed from that position due to misconduct and incompetence. This is clearly an absurd situation. It's like having Keith Richards as a sobriety counsellor. If a person has failed to serve the public as a judge or a Chapter 9 head, to the extent that their removal was warranted, how could they be qualified to represent the public in Parliament (and draw another taxpayer-funded salary)? This situation is damaging to the functioning of Parliament and, more importantly, the public's trust in the legislature. But it is entirely legal. Section 89 of the Constitution, which deals with the removal of a president, states a removed president "may not serve in any public office". But Section 77, which deals with the removal of judges, and Section 194, which deals with the removal of Chapter 9 heads, has no such provisions. Furthermore, Section 47, which set out the conditions for membership of the National Assembly, doesn't preclude removed judges or Chapter 9 heads. Presumably, the drafters of our Constitution didn't foresee a situation in which political parties would send people, who were found by Parliament to have misconducted themselves or to be incompetent, to Parliament. But here we are. Perhaps it is time to consider a constitutional amendment to preclude removed judges and Chapter 9 heads from holding further public office. It would be surprising if such an amendment made it onto the legislative agenda anytime soon. The bigger issue here is the quality of candidates that parties send to Parliament. Lists are drawn up by party bosses and appear to be more a product of party machinations than selecting people with the skills to serve the public in Parliament. They are, after all, the public's representatives. When Chief Justice Raymond Zondo administered the swearing in of members on 14 June, several ANC MPs' names would have sounded familiar, as a former majority party sent to Parliament a rogue's gallery, which had featured prominently in the report of the commission into state capture that he chaired. One of these, Faith Muthambi, was found by a parliamentary inquiry into the SABC to be incompetent as communications minister. Parliament's legal services later found that her testimony to the committee "could be seen as an attempt to mislead the inquiry". But yet, here she is, for another term to oversee the executive. On the same day that the MKP MPs were sworn in, ANC MP Zizi Kodwa was sworn in, despite standing trial on corruption charges. This, too, is legal. Then, the DA, who often boasts about its rigorous candidate selection process, had to suspend Renaldo Gouws days after he was sworn in over a video he posted online years ago in which he said: "Kill all the k****rs". Gouws, often at the centre of social media polemics, first claimed that the video was fake, but the DA established that it was the real deal. The question remains: how did he get on the list in the first place? There is increasing pressure from civil society for electoral reform, especially a hybrid constituency/proportional list system - which, in theory at least, should force political parties to put up better candidates and ensure better accountability. The current state of affairs highlights why electoral reform is necessary. But don't hold your breath. It is, after all, MPs who would have to pass this legislation, and chickens don't vote for Nando's. However, it is ultimately the electorate who sends MPs to Parliament, through their votes to parties. Electoral lists are published before the elections and the public can even raise objections. Jacob Zuma would know all about this. A 58% voter turnout suggests that the electorate weren't exactly enthused about the candidates, albeit unlikely that a large portion of the electorate actually scrutinised the lists and voted accordingly. Mkhwebane, who was on the EFF's list, could rightly argue that 9.8% of the electorate wanted her in Parliament. Hlophe can't make the same argument. The MKP found a loophole in the electoral legislation to amend its lists after the elections, which saw the inclusion of Hlophe and Andile Mngxitama, the former EFF MP, BLF leader and alleged Gupta shill, among others. This loophole has to be fixed, otherwise what is the point of allowing the public to object to the lists? Over the last two weeks or so, the public's appetite to hold parties accountable for who they send to Parliament seems to have been whetted. After Gouws' video emerged, an online petition for the DA to remove him was created, and a similar petition is doing the rounds for Mngxitama over racial remarks he made, albeit that the Equality Court cleared him. Given the current legislative framework, this is what is required. The public will have to police their public representatives and demand accountability from parties. And if parties don't listen, the only way is to hurt them at the ballot box. We'll get another chance for that in, oh, only five years' time.