NEWS Top Johannesburg-based law firm Lawtons Africa has blasted the ANC for allegedly failing to pay invoices it submitted for the legal services it began to render to the party more than a decade ago. The law firm has accused the party of ignoring a legal bill, which has swelled to more than R300 000 since August 2014. The law firm has revealed that the service agreement was signed by Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy Gwede Mantashe, who was then ANC secretary-general when the party solicited the legal services. READ: ANC taken to court over R3 million debt for rent Lawtons Africa cites in its particulars of claim filed in the Johannesburg High Court last week that its plea for payments from the party has fallen on deaf ears, leaving it with no other recourse but to approach the courts. It further cites that the final letter of demand sent to the ANC was in June 2021 after it represented the party’s interests in legal action taken against it by Johannesburg city councillors. The particulars of the claim read: Lawtons Africa has tried to claim payment from the ANC through various verbal and written communications; however, these attempts have given rise to no success. Despite various demands, the ANC has refused to pay its outstanding debt, which remains due. The ANC, which dropped to below 50% during the May national and provincial elections, has been at loggerheads with numerous service providers, with some of them taking the party to court. READ: ANC takes fight against R102m election material bill to Supreme Court of Appeals City Press reported in September last year that the party was at odds with the landlords of its merchandise store in Gandhi Square, Johannesburg, following the former ruling party’s alleged breach of the lease agreement, which has accumulated monthly rentals to over R3 million. The owners of the premises, Gandhi Square Property Holdings, lodged a court application at the Johannesburg High Court on 13 September to compel the ANC to pay R3 218 218.00 for contravening the terms of its contract that was agreed on in 2019. READ: ANC’s Concourt appeal doomed, but R150m election branding debt won't bar party from 2024 polls The deal also entailed the ANC paying for the pro-rated costs of water and electricity that they use while conducting business at the premises, including municipal charges. The papers read: Should the Gandhi Square Property Fund provide the ANC with electricity from a generator, in the case of a power outage, the defendant would pay to the plaintiff the pro rata costs of fuel and maintenance of the generator. According to the papers, the agreement made provisions that, should the ANC fail to effect rent payment, under those circumstances the property company had the right to approach the courts for intervention. “The ANC would be liable for any costs incurred by Gandhi Square Property Holdings when enforcing any of its rights on the defendant’s obligations under the agreement, on an attorney and own client scale, which would include collection charges, whether such costs would be incurred before the institution of any such action or application…” read the court papers. The papers further mentioned that the ANC occupied the premises, as per the agreement, and was currently operating from it. City Press approached ANC spokesperson Mahlengi Bhengu-Motsiri for comment; however, both phone calls and texts sent went unanswered.