The so-called progressive caucus has called for Section 25 of the Constitution to be amended, despite the Expropriation Bill awaiting President Cyril Ramaphosa's signature. ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula says the ANC wants "what is before the president to be accomplished" first, before an amendment can be considered. GNU partners like the DA, IFP and FF Plus were vehemently opposed to a previous, unsuccessful amendment. The ANC is not particularly enthusiastic about the MK Party and EFF's calls to revive a constitutional amendment to allow expropriation of land without compensation. Despite the Expropriation Bill awaiting President Cyril Ramaphosa's signature, the "progressive caucus" - made up of the MK Party, EFF, United Africans Transformation, African Transformation Movement and National Coloured Congress - called for an amendment to Section 25 of the Constitution to allow expropriation without compensation during the Opening of Parliament Address debate on Friday. ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula told journalists at a briefing this weekend that the ANC wants "what is before the president to be accomplished", but did not rule out a Section 25 amendment down the line. During the debate on Friday, MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe, the first judge to be removed from the Bench in democratic South Africa, said they remained firm that Section 25 of the Constitution must be amended to allow for expropriation without compensation. They would do this within the bounds of the law, he said. In 2021, the National Assembly failed to pass a constitutional amendment to the Constitution's property clause. However, the Expropriation Bill, which would allow land to be expropriated without compensation under certain circumstances, made its way through Parliament and was finally adopted and sent for Ramaphosa's assent in March. "We wait for what is before the president to be accomplished. The land reform programme must not stop. It must proceed," said Mbalula after being asked if the ANC would support the calls to amend Section 25. "We may as well arrive at that decision at a later stage. But at the present moment, we have made significant progress in terms what is before the president's desk … and we must give the president a chance to process that, and from there we move forward and so on. "But it does not mean government must stop the programme of land reform going forward; that is what is important." The previous process to amend Section 25 started in February 2018, when the ANC supported an EFF motion, with changes, to amend the Constitution to allow expropriation without compensation. However, a chasm between the two parties on which form the amendment should take was apparent from the start of the process, with the EFF insisting that all land should be held in state custodianship. When the amendment was before the National Assembly in December 2021, EFF leader Julius Malema called the ANC sellouts "captured by white monopoly capital", preoccupied with maintaining the status quo and protecting the property rights of white landowners. His speech on Friday hit similar notes. READ | MKP, EFF's 'sell-out' narrative is 'opportunistic', says Fikile Mbalula The issue of expropriation without compensation could also prove divisive in the government of national unity (GNU). Several opposition parties - including the DA, IFP and FF Plus, which are now all part of the GNU - have previously staunchly opposed the amendment. After the Expropriation Bill was passed in March, the DA's then deputy chief whip, Annelie Lotriet, described it as "yet another reckless attack on the Constitution by the ANC". The DA also instructed its lawyers to write a letter of demand to Ramaphosa not to sign the bill, adding that it would consider legal steps. Lotriet is now the deputy speaker of the National Assembly. The department overseeing the Expropriation Bill is the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure, whose minister is Dean Macpherson, also from the DA. Similar to the EFF, the MK Party wants to nationalise all land. In its manifesto, the party plans to "expropriate all land without compensation, transferring ownership to the people under the custodianship of the state and traditional leaders". The progressive caucus does not have nearly enough votes to muster the required supermajority to amend the Constitution.