The DA confirmed that 'final touches' are being made to seal the deal to form a government of national unity with the ANC. The deal comes after Friday's crucial meeting between President Cyril Ramaphosa and John Steenhuisen. The agreement to form a GNU could see Ramaphosa finally announcing his Cabinet. After weeks of extensive wheeling and dealing, leaked confidential correspondence, and late-night meetings, the ANC and the DA have finally made a deal to establish a government of national unity. On Sunday morning, DA leader John Steenhuisen confirmed that a meeting on Friday, to mend relations with President Cyril Ramaphosa, yielded positive results. READ | Cabinet deal almost sealed, but late EFF entry to GNU could spell trouble for the DA He said: "We have reached a deal, but there are final touches that still need to be done." While it is rumoured that the DA secured six Cabinet positions, including communications, basic education, forestry, home affairs, public works, and agriculture, Steenhuisen did not confirm or deny this. ANC's acting spokesperson, Zuko Godlimpi, said the ANC had been finalising an agreement with all the signed-up members of the GNU and not just one party. "The finality of that will be communicated by the president when he announces the national executive of government." Godlimpi confirmed that the ANC had a meeting with the EFF on Friday to discuss the prospects of working within the GNU. "The secretary-general indeed received a letter from the EFF yesterday and will give a detailed response to their letter." He added that the announcement about when the president will address the nation on the GNU Cabinet will made by the presidency spokesperson. READ: COALITION NATION | EFF proposes coalition with ANC, without DA and FF Plus According to Rapport, the agriculture portfolio will no longer include land reform, as it did earlier. Both the ANC and the DA were reportedly in favour of this. The DA's federal executive council still has to approve the offer, but it is expected to do so on Sunday – along with a decision on who the ministers will be. The successful talks came after an impasse, which saw the DA almost walking away from the negotiation table. Since losing its majority rule in the May general elections, the ANC has been in talks to form a government of national unity (GNU) with nine political parties – the DA, Patriotic Alliance, GOOD, Al Jama-ah, Rise Mzansi, PAC, UDM, IFP, and the FF Plus. Negotiations are now entering a third week, as parties struggle to find each other. The deadlock between the DA and the ANC has led to Ramaphosa delaying his announcement of the new and inclusive Cabinet. Friday's make-or-break meeting between Steenhuisen and Ramaphosa came after a scathing letter where the latter admonished the DA for "moving the goalposts". READ: COALITION NATION | GNU talks back on track, but IFP urges ANC, DA to speed things up Last week, Ramaphosa, an experienced negotiator, wrote to Steenhuisen, accusing him of wanting to set up an illegal "parallel government" that would operate outside the parameters of the Constitution. The leaked letter, dated 25 June, came after the ANC had made a final offer of six Cabinet posts. The DA then demanded two further posts, which News24 understands angered Ramaphosa and ANC negotiators. Ramaphosa then withdrew a crucial post – trade and industry – from the initial offer to the DA, in response to the DA's earlier comeback. Then-DA chief whip John Steenhuisen congratulating Cyril Ramaphosa after he was sworn in as the president of SA in Parliament on 15 February 2018. (Esa Alexander/Gallo Images/Sowetan) Gallo Images His letter to Steenhuisen, in his capacity as ANC president, began by admonishing the opposition leader for insisting on conducting negotiations through written correspondence. Sunday's news of a deal being made came after IFP president Velenkosini Hlabisa, who also plays a key role in the GNU due to his party's support in KwaZulu-Natal, called for the ANC and DA to speed up the process. On Friday, Hlabisa said the IFP was not immediately concerned when "alarmist reports began to emerge of a potential stalemate". "There was, as far as we could see, no crisis. We understood that there would be necessary teething problems in the formation of the government of national unity," he told journalists. Meanwhile, the EFF has written to the ANC, asking it to consider forming a coalition that would keep the DA and the FF Plus out of power. EFF secretary-general, Marshall Dlamini, told ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula: "The EFF is willing to constitute and participate in an ANC-led government, together with other parties, with the exception of the Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus." Dlamini proposed that a new agreement or statement of intent between the ANC and EFF be drawn up – essentially saying the ANC should dump its GNU partners and enter into a coalition with the EFF. Dlamini told his counterpart: "Such an agreement or statement of intent must necessarily include key principles informed by the strategic objective of the total liberation of the oppressed as encapsulated in the Freedom Charter and progressive internationalism. "The agreement, or statement of intent, must also necessarily include the principles of redress and equality as captured in Section 9.2 of the Constitution, which states that 'to promote the achievement of equality, legislative and other measures designed to protect or advance persons, or categories of persons, disadvantaged by unfair discrimination may be taken'." Meanwhile, BOSA leader, Mmusi Maimane, on Saturday revealed that he also met with the ANC to consider the modalities of a governing coalition at a national level. He said in a statement: "From our side, the implementation of the GNU's statement of intent is vital for any new government to be formed and to govern. To this end, our call for a National Convention – comprising all 18 Parliamentary parties – is now urgent. "This offers the most democratic and transparent pathway to agreeing on the composition of a new national government that is values-based and delivery-based." He went on to say: "We have committed to be constructive in all engagements and have agreed that once a plan of action is determined, we can support the government on an issue-by-issue basis."