ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli is worried about the conduct of some political parties in the government of national unity (GNU). According to Ntuli, some Cabinet ministers are aligning themselves with their respective parties. He said Cabinet ministers should work as one and be led only by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Some partners in the government of national unity (GNU) are distinguishing themselves along party lines in the national executive. If left unchecked, this worrying tendency would go against the spirit of the Constitution. That is the warning from ANC parliamentary chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli. In a statement, the ANC has cautioned the national Cabinet to act as one, led by President Cyril Ramaphosa. "The caucus further congratulates our members who have been deployed to various responsibilities in government and we stand ready to support their work while ensuring that the executive branch remains accountable to the South African citizens through Parliament. "Consequently, the caucus cautions the national executive, which comprises seven political parties represented in the GNU, to act as one executive led by President Cyril Ramaphosa as head of the executive as defined in s83 of the Constitution and not as individual political parties in the executive," he said. Ntuli added: We have already noted some GNU partners seeking to distinguish themselves along party lines in the executive, a worrying tendency which, if left unchecked, would go against the spirit of the Constitution, which calls for collective accountability of a single executive. On Wednesday, Chief Justice Raymond Zondo presided over the swearing-in of ministers and deputy ministers at a ceremony in Cape Town. Ramaphosa announced the names of the members of the seventh administration on Sunday evening. He appointed several members from different political parties when establishing the GNU as no party received an outright majority in the 29 May polls. Meanwhile, Parliament has also got its house in order as it prepares to start the official work of the seventh administration. READ | Even with just 40% of the power, ANC is still king of parliamentary jungle The National Assembly has determined that each of its 30 portfolio committees will have 11 members. Of the 11 members, four would be from the ANC, the DA and MK Party will get two seats each, while the EFF will get one, and other (smaller) parties will be allocated two seats. Several opposition parties have also called for the establishment of a committee to oversee the Presidency, but this will only be deliberated on next Tuesday. MPs have also undergone an intensive four-day induction and orientation programme. IN PICTURES: Today’s session of the induction of new Members of Parliament. #7thParliament #30YearsofDemocracy #30YearsofDemocraticParliament pic.twitter.com/ppMs4Rbpv6 — Parliament of RSA (@ParliamentofRSA) July 4, 2024 Ntuli said significant progress has already been made with parliamentary committees being formed. "The committees are configured to execute their constitutionally mandated responsibility to hold the respective departments and organs of state in the seventh administration accountable. In furtherance of our mandate to ensure scrutiny and exercise oversight over the work of government, the ANC, led by the chief whip, will, as a matter of urgency, engage parties participating in the GNU to appoint the chairpersons and whips of the parliamentary oversight committees," Ntuli said. He also said the people of South Africa anticipate a Parliament that embodies their interests and caters for their needs. "We are resolute in transforming this expectation into a tangible reality, ensuring that the seventh Parliament is an instrument of people's power and belongs to the masses," he said.