Former minister Zizi Kodwa's swearing-in as an MP earlier this week raised eyebrows. He is charged with corruption and recently appeared in court. The ANC issued a memo to its national executive committee (NEC) members to explain to them why Kodwa, charged with corruption, is deployed to the National Assembly. The ANC has responded to the public backlash against its deployment of corruption-accused former minister Zizi Kodwa to the National Assembly as a lawmaker. Kodwa was sworn in as an ANC MP on Tuesday, despite being charged recently in connection with allegedly taking a bribe. The ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula, in a memo to the party's national executive committee (NEC) members on Thursday, sought to explain why Kodwa is back in Parliament. In light of Kodwa's swearing-in as a lawmaker, critics started questioning whether the step-aside policy was selectively applied along factional lines. "Certain comrades were nominated to be ANC candidates in the 2024 national and provincial elections. They were not disqualified by the ANC electoral committee, and their nominations were tabled before the special extended NEC meeting held on 4 March 2024," said Mbalula in the memo. That meeting in March decided, among other things: To approve the national-to-national, province-to-national and province-to-province lists, subject to refinements by the ANC electoral committee; To mandate ANC national officials to finalise the lists as refined and presented by the party's electoral committee; To finalise the consideration of all outstanding integrity commission reports as a matter of urgency; To mandate the national officials to finalise any matters pertaining to the inclusion or exclusion of candidates affected by the findings and recommendations of the integrity commission; That the NEC be instructed to finalise the consideration of outstanding integrity commission reports on members named in the Zondo Commission report on an urgent basis; and That Mbalula be mandated to expedite the disciplinary proceedings against members named in the Zondo Commission and who had not presented themselves to the integrity commission, in line with the decision taken by the NEC on 21 last April. Acting on the mandate, the ANC's national officials considered the position of a number of candidates fingered in the Zondo Commission report, making recommendations about the candidates' inclusion or exclusion on the list. "A report in this regard was presented to a special NEC meeting on 7 March 2024. The NEC decided that these matters should be held in abeyance for further consideration after the 2024 national and provincial elections," said Mbalula. "Accordingly, the NEC did not adopt the recommendation by the national officials that certain comrades should be ineligible to stand as an ANC candidate in the 2024 (elections)." The elections were held on 29 May and the results were announced on 2 June 2024, after which candidates became members of Parliament with effect from 29 May 2024. "In one case (of Kodwa), subsequent to being (re)elected as a member of Parliament, a comrade was arrested on charges of corruption. By this time, the comrade had ceased to be a member of Parliament, along with all other MPs, following the dissolution of Parliament," said Mbalula in the memo. READ | Corruption-accused Zizi Kodwa returns to Parliament, despite step-aside rule "With regard to his position as a member of Parliament, [Mbalula] has written to the chief whip of the (ANC), drawing his attention to the following provisions of the proposed terms and conditions for the participation of members, elected office bearers and public representatives who have stepped aside voluntarily." The terms, among other things, say that during the period when the person is a public representative, they may not hold any executive office, such as minister or MEC, and may not represent the ANC publicly or in any other forum. The member may also not make public pronouncements on matters related to the ANC. "We trust that the above clarifies the position regarding the membership of certain comrades of the National Assembly in terms of the relevant ANC conference resolutions and NEC decisions," said Mbalula. "As indicated above, the special NEC meeting on 7 March 2024 decided that these matters should be discussed further after the 2024 (elections) at a regular NEC meeting."