Nomvuyo Mhlakaza-Manamela has been re-elected Gauteng's deputy speaker She was elected unopposed on Thursday Her election follows the resignation of the DA's Refiloe Nt'sekhe. The Gauteng legislature has re-elected Nomvuyo Mhlakaza-Manamela as its deputy speaker. She was elected unopposed after Human Settlements MEC Tasneem Motara nominated her and ANC chief whip Lesego Makhubela seconded the nomination. Mhlakaza-Manamela also served as the deputy speaker in the sixth administration. In a brief acceptance speech, she said she was humbled by her re-election. READ | Ebrahim Harvey: Lesufi’s big gamble in Gauteng will backfire She said the people of Gauteng had given the seventh administration a mandate and that she requested that all political parties in the legislature work together in delivering services to them."Our egos aside, our political caps aside, but importantly, let's go and continue with the work of servicing citizens. "Importantly chair, as a last point, we inherited this institution from our predecessors and they gave it to us with credibility and dignity, I request that we continue where those who have walked before us [left off] in keeping the dignity and decorum of this institutions. We will not collapse this house," said Mhlakaza-Manamela. ANC Gauteng Congratulates it’s Provincial Executive Committee Member Cde Vuyo Mhlakaza-Manamela on her election as Deputy Speaker for the Gauteng Legislature 7th Administration #LetsDoMoreTogether#GrowingGautengTogether?????? pic.twitter.com/sX4IbBCgmL — Gauteng ANC (@GautengANC) July 11, 2024 On Thursday, the Gauteng legislature held a special sitting to elect the deputy speaker following the resignation of the DA's Refiloe Nt'sekhe. Her resignation came after the DA and the ANC could not reach consensus on forming a government in the province. The stalemate led to Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi announcing an executive that excluded the DA last week. READ | ACDP's Dulton Adams and ANC's Thulani Kunene to ensure the 'centre holds' in Gauteng legislature At the meeting on Tuesday, the speaker, Morakane Mosupyoe, confirmed that Nt’sekhe had resigned with immediate effect but would remain an MPL. Thanking Nt'sekhe, the speaker said: "I extend my gratitude to Honourable Refiloe Nt'sekhe for her service and leadership. Her decision to step down is regrettable, but I am confident that we will find a suitable candidate to fulfil this crucial role in our legislature."