Former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party withdrew its application to have the 2024 general elections declared null and void. The party alleges that widespread irregularities occurred in the elections, but it is yet to provide evidence of that. Meanwhile, the electoral commission has asked the Electoral Court to hear the matter, alleging that the withdrawal is irregular. Days after the MK Party (MKP) withdrew its Electoral Court application to have the 2024 general elections declared null and void, party leader Jacob Zuma maintained that evidence that vote-rigging had occurred was "as big as an elephant". However, the party is yet to produce the evidence. News24 recently reported that the MKP's lawyer, Barnabas Xulu, had written to the IEC's legal team to confirm the "temporary" withdrawal. Xulu wrote: "The withdrawal is in no way an admission that our client does not have a compelling case for the orders it seeks. The contrary is true." He added that the MKP's "experts" were being engaged and would "continue to uncover further evidence of election irregularities". "The MK Party's experts require time to prepare comprehensive reports involving a thorough assessment of the IEC results," the letter stated. READ | MK Party drops application to challenge election results, but that's not the end of the matter However, the Sunday Times reported that the IEC had written to the court to ask it to set down the application for argument, alleging that the notice of withdrawal was "irregular". In the IEC's responding affidavit, chief electoral officer Sy Mamabolo said the MKP "misrepresented the actual election data and results and that its central allegation - that over 9.3 million votes are unaccounted for - is patently false". "When these egregious allegations were made, the applicant must have been aware of the absence of evidence to support them, but elected to make them nevertheless. The only inference that can be drawn from this approach is that these allegations were made with the aim of inflaming the passions of the public," Mamabolo said. But Zuma is adamant that it's not the end of the case. In a video the MKP captured on Sunday, Zuma can be seen addressing a crowd of people and claiming: The evidence we've received is as big as an elephant. It's a lot. Now, lawyers have to write all of that down. The case is coming. There is nowhere [across the country] where they didn't rob us. He said critics were trying to "rush" the MKP into submitting its application "so that the truth doesn't come out" and added: "We have evidence now. When we postpone, it doesn't mean it's the end of the case."