Transport Minister Barbara Creecy delivered her first budget vote speech. She lamented that funds had been returned instead of roads being maintained. The department would focus on road safety to prevent fatalities. Transport Minister Barbara Creecy says her department will give "immediate attention" to provincial departments and entities' underspending of funds for road maintenance and construction. Road safety will also be high on the transport department's to-do list. Creecy delivered the department's budget vote speech on Monday and said the underspending was unacceptable and inexcusable. She said roads were deteriorating throughout the country because they were not being maintained. But many provinces, she added, were returning unused funds to the National Treasury. Creecy said: In a country where citizens must daily navigate the hazards of potholes it is unconscionable that we are returning money to National Treasury. She added that the department would prioritise road safety. "Every year, our country sees in excess of 10 000 fatal crashes, which the Road Traffic Management Corporation estimates amount to almost 3% of our annual Gross Domestic Product," she said. Deputy Transport Minister Mkhuleko Hlengwa also spoke during the budget vote. He said statistics showed that up to 87% of road fatalities were caused by road user behaviour and that the department would devise a behaviour change programme across the road sector to prevent the loss of life. "We will commit ourselves to fight pedestrian deaths, which are the highest segment of victims in the country. Approximately 10% of registered vehicles in South Africa are not roadworthy, and the average age of these vehicles is 11 years, which contributes to the increasing potential of road crashes and road fatalities. Furthermore, it is estimated that around 40% of vehicles on our roads are not insured. "South Africa, generally, has good road infrastructure. We understand the challenges, particularly around potholes and the impact they have on road safety, and therefore, they are a factor in road accidents," said Hlengwa. READ | UPDATE: Presidency clarifies future of Eskom, Transnet Creecy said one of the key priorities in the next financial year would be to stabilise and improve the governance of the department and its entities. She said this included assessing critical vacancies and making appointments to fill vacant positions. The minister said the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa would continue to rehabilitate and open more strategic train corridors for commuters. She said this was being done to ensure that South Africans could rely on a safe, punctual and affordable rail service. Creecy said, as of March, 256 train stations were fully operational across the country, and the entity continued to reopen passenger lines affected by infrastructure damage and cable theft, with 28 of 40 priority lines being fully operational. She also pledged to work with the taxi industry and promised to decrease conflict and violence, which she said posed a significant risk to the sector and commuters. The DA and the ANC accepted Creecy's budget. The EFF and the MK Party were among the parties that rejected it. The EFF's Nontando Nolutshungu lamented an unsafe and inaccessible public transport system, especially in rural areas. She said taxis were the most commonly used mode of transport, but it was expensive and unsafe for commuters, who were constantly exposed to violence. Nolutshungu said: The reality is that those most affected by violence are workers with no alternative form of transport. ActionSA's Malebo Kobe urged Creecy to look into regulating e-hailing services in the country. "Every other day, we wake up to horrific stories of women who are abused and who suffer at the hands of e-hailing drivers. It is gravely concerning that, with the safety concerns that continue to be flagged, there seems to be no real plan to regulate this industry. "Without regulation, it continues to operate in the shadows, operating with impunity," said Kobe. Department of Transport’s Budget Vote:“Given the current status of the transport sector, my first task in this 7th Administration is to stabilise the transport system in our country and make our Department fit to fulfil its policy-making and regulatory role.”#BudgetVote2024 pic.twitter.com/Q3cEtYpkX6 — Department of Transport (@Dotransport) July 15, 2024 There was a slight disruption to the programme when MK Party and EFF MPs lamented the lack of translators and that the only available translations were English and Afrikaans. The MPs said they felt abused, that their languages were undermined, and that Afrikaans and English were being "imposed" on them. They said they raised the same issue last week, and it was concerning that Parliament was not taking it seriously. They proposed adjourning the session until translators were available, but the chairperson shot down the suggestion.