The ATM has filed court papers asking the Gauteng High Court in Pretoria to set aside the Public Protector's Phala Phala report. ATM president Vuyo Zungula submitted all indications showed Kholeka Gcaleka's investigation was a foregone conclusion He said he believed there was a conflict of interest in that Gcaleka investigated the president who had the final say in who replaced the disgraced Busisiwe Mkhwebane. The African Transformation Movement (ATM) has claimed in court papers Public Protector Kholeka Gcaleka whitewashed the probe in President Cyril Ramaphosa's couch dollars - and was lining herself up for her predecessor's post. In a replying affidavit filed at the Gauteng High Court in Pretoria on 3 July, the ATM wants the court to set aside the Public Protector report into the Phala Phala saga. ATM president Vuyo Zungula told News24 that some of Gcaleka's reasons for clearing Ramaphosa were "irrational and flawed". "In our view, we feel that the manner in which the investigation was conducted was below par and we want the report to be truly set aside. "For us, her report was shoddy, influenced by a lot of things, but critical to that, was a conflict of interest that arose in terms of her interest in being appointed as Public Protector, and the conflict is that the persons that could decide are the very person that she was investigating," said Zungula, referring to Ramaphosa. READ | Ramaphosa's Phala Phala farm to refund Sudanese businessman for alleged buffalo purchase In June 2023, Gcaleka cleared Ramaphosa of wrongdoing, but found Major-General Wally Rhoode, head of the Presidential Protection Service, was not authorised to investigate the burglary on his farm. However, a Section 89 Independent Panel report, which examined whether there was enough evidence to impeach the president, found Ramaphosa had a case to answer to in Parliament. The SA Reserve Bank also found the US$580 000 that was paid as a deposit for buffalo by a Sudanese buyer, which was hidden in a sofa by an employee and subsequently stolen in a robbery, did not violate any exchange control laws. According to the Mail & Guardian, the Constitutional Court has agreed to hear an application where the EFF is asking that Ramaphosa face impeachment over the saga. The publication stated the court had given Ramaphosa, the Speaker, National Assembly, and all parties represented in it to file written arguments by 19 July and 26 July. The court papers filed by the ATM - and not related to the Constitutional Court case - cite Gcaleka, Ramaphosa, John Henry Steenhuisen, Elias Muller, and Simphiwe Ndlovu as respondents. The ATM is responding to papers filed by Gcaleka in March 2024 and Ramaphosa in February 2024. READ | ATM leader Vuyo Zungula claims Phala Phala death threats In court papers, Zungula said the ATM's application challenges Gcaleka's report "and her decision to approve the report without, inter alia, calling certain witnesses to give evidence, considering material and relevant information, and investigating matters relevant to whether the president violated the Constitution and the Executive Ethics Code". He added Gcaleka decided not to interview Silvester Ndlovu, the man Ramaphosa is alleged to have instructed regarding the price at which the buffalo should be sold and the handling of the money. Zungula said Gcaleka also failed to obtain evidence from Ramaphosa's then-helper Floriana Nduumona and the tax records of Ntaba Nyoni Estates CC - the entity involved. He put it to the court that: If the Public Protector proceeded from the incorrect legal principles, failed to obtain relevant evidence, and elected not to investigate matters in circumstances where she was required to, then the investigation and the findings contained in her report do not meet the standards of a 'proper investigation'. Zungula said the Public Protector must tell the nation why she did not ask the president the following questions: "why is the president in constant communication with Mr Von Wielligh [the general manager] regarding Phala Phala". "How did the president identify foreign buyers? When did this occur? And how did the president know there would be a 'luxurious deal', and under what circumstances did he secure a 'good deal'?" In the court papers, he said Gcaleka also failed to provide a cogent explanation for why the common cause evidence was rationally connected to the conclusion Ramaphosa did not conduct other paid work. READ | Ramaphosa bares full financials to ANC committee as party seeks to avoid 'another Phala Phala' Zungula added the failure to interview Ndlovu was irrational, saying it made no sense Ndlovu, Rhoode, and Ramaphosa's former political advisor, Bejani Chauke, were all represented by one law firm. He also found it "extraordinary" that Gcaleka did not speak to Nduumona (the temporary helper), considering there were serious allegations that people could have been paid not to talk about the incident. "Her failure to obtain evidence relevant to an issue that she investigated was irrational and unlawful," added Zungula. Turning to the tax issue, he said the contention Gcaleka investigated these matters must be rejected. "She plainly abandoned her investigation because she regarded SARS and the SARB as being better placed to investigate tax and exchange control contraventions. "But of course, the Public Protector herself recognised that the tax and exchange control issues affected whether the Executive Ethics Code was violated - a matter that falls within the authority of the Public Protector. "Not only did the Public Protector not have the power to abandon her investigation, but her decision to do so was also irrational." Zungula stated he believed Gcaleka knew what she wanted the outcome to be before concluding her investigation. He told the court: I submit that all indications show that her investigation was indeed a foregone conclusion. "For all the reasons set out in the ATM's founding and supplementary founding affidavits, it submits that the Public Protector's cumulative errors demonstrate that the outcome of her investigation was a foregone conclusion." Zangula told News24 the reason why the ATM had turned to the courts was because Gcaleka's reasoning in the matter was questionable. "It can't be that there is an allegation that the suspects, including the helper, were bribed with certain amounts of money for them to keep quiet about the burglary and what transpired, but you, as the Public Protector, accept that the helper does not want to speak to people. "You don't see anything untoward in the fact that there is one law firm representing the three different people involved in the same incident. "It was shoddy because only the Public Protector, as a Chapter 9 institution, can investigate the Executive Members Ethics Act [EMEA]. Zungula said he believed there was a conflict of interest in the matter in that she was investigating Ramaphosa, who had the final say in who replaced her predecessor, Busisiwe Mkhwebane. He added: There was definitely a conflict of interest when it came to her dealing with this particular complaint because the person who influenced whether she was appointed as Public Protector or not was the very same person that she was investigating. She was investigating the head of state, who happens to be the head of a political party with majority rule in Parliament. That majority could decide whether she gets the job or not. Zungula questioned why the Independent Panel Report, led by reputable Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo, found Ramaphosa had a case to answer to while Gcaleka cleared the president. Public Protector's spokesperson, Khulu Phasiwe, confirmed that the office received the ATM's replying affidavit. Without responding to specific questions News24 asked, Phasiwe said: "This is not a new application. It is still a part of the original litigation. The parties will file their respective heads of argument, and later, the matter will be ventilated by hearing on a date still to be set."