Basic Education Minister Siviwe Gwarube delivered her maiden budget vote speech on Monday, focusing on school infrastructure. Civil society organisations have called on her to review the revised Norms and Standards for School Infrastructure. Gwarube told the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education that she would work with education MECs to ensure they spend their budgets. Basic Education Minister Siviwe Gwarube says she will review the recently published Norms and Standards for School Infrastructure to ensure they are clear and lead to improvement. Gwarube also committed to helping provinces eradicate pit toilets in schools while delivering the Department of Basic Education (DBE) budget vote speech on Monday under the seventh administration. Last week, civil society organisations, including Equal Education, Section 27 and Legal Resources Centre, called on Gwarube to review the revised regulations, which they said lacked clear deadlines and oversight mechanisms. Equal Education has been at the centre of ensuring that the department implements the norms and standards for years. The organisation took the department to court to force it to publish the norms and standards, which it eventually did in 2013. However, in a joint statement last week, the civil society organisations took issue with the revised regulations that were published on 27 June, saying they "dilute critical obligations previously placed on the DBE and provincial education departments (PEDs) to make urgent and adequate provision for infrastructure at public schools". "The amendments are a regressive measure that demonstrates a shift from ensuring equality in education, especially to black learners and learners from rural and low-income areas. "These revisions are wholly inadequate. They permit PEDs to use their own discretion to determine how school infrastructure projects should be prioritised and by when they should be completed." The statement added: This is extremely problematic, given their lack of urgency in addressing infrastructure backlogs. According to the DBE's most recent Education Facility Management data, dated August 2023, 728 schools still only use plain pit toilets, over 16 700 schools do not have libraries, and more than 18 600 schools still do not have science laboratories. In her budget vote speech, Gwarube said the department's priorities in the seventh administration include reducing overcrowding, improving access to electricity, water and adequate sanitation facilities, and removing inappropriate structures in schools, such as pit latrines. "In particular, I will carefully review the recently published Norms and Standards for School Infrastructure to ensure that they offer greater clarity and drive meaningful improvements in this regard. We cannot have learners in danger of drowning in pit toilets or learning in inappropriate structures 30 years into our democracy," she said. In her reply to the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education members, who responded to her budget speech vote, Gwarube said the deep inequalities in the basic education sector "are not lost to the team that I lead or me". "I want to make the undertaking that the department and I will work tirelessly to make sure and to assist provinces in eradicating pit toilets in this country. It cannot be that 30 years [into democracy], there are still children who have to drown in these kinds of inappropriate infrastructures or still have to learn in places where there is no roof or window," she said. READ | ANALYSIS: Seven areas the new basic education minister needs to address to overhaul the system Gwarube added that she would visit provinces and assist education MECs in implementing their budgets. The minister reminded the MPs that her department's functions are concurrent with those of the provincial education departments. "You will see that the huge allocation of this department and its budget is sent to provinces to spend against their targets. "MECs do not report to the minister of [basic] education, MECs report to premiers, and so mine is a collaborative relationship where I have to work with MECs to make sure that budgets are spent ... that we are eradicating pit toilets, that we are making sure that teachers are safe at schools at all times," she said. Gwarube then listed five other priority areas her department will be focusing on under the new administration. They are: Improving access to and quality of early childhood development; Improving literacy and numeracy skills across all spheres of schooling; Improving access to and the quality of inclusive education; Improving access to and the quality of training and professional development opportunities available to school management teams and teachers; and Improving the safety and quality of schooling environments for pupils and teachers. Speaking on the numeracy and literacy challenges faced by many pupils across the country, Gwarube said she had already been approached by parents of Grade 4 pupils who cannot count or read for meaning. "They want to know how we will reconcile that reality with setting targets to increase the National Senior Certificate pass rate or improve the percentage of Bachelor's passes. "Those challenges, articulated by parents, are reflected in our current achievement levels in international benchmarks in which we participate," she said. She added: "While there has been improvement, our literacy and numeracy rates remain unacceptably low ... My team and I will obsess about getting learners at all levels in the system to be able to read for meaning." Gwarube also revealed that she would establish an advisory council representative of the basic education system "as soon as possible". She said the advisory council would consist of key sector stakeholders and experts in key disciplines. "This council, once up and running, will be an invaluable resource in ensuring that our efforts to strengthen our education system are targeted, evidence-based, and informed by best practice," she said.