The NFP is once again gripped by internal squabbles and one of the lead negotiators is threatening to pull the party out of the government of provincial unity (GPU) deal. This time, the party is bickering about the Zululand District Municipality's mayoral seat. One of the leaders has opened a case of crimen injuria after he received what he called a "threatening" voice note that called him "bewitched", a "donkey" and a host of expletives. NFP factions are again at the fore over the stalling of a quid pro quo GPU deal with the IFP, which would have seen the NFP lead at least two municipalities in KwaZulu-Natal. The bone of contention among NFP leaders is the mayoral seat in the Zululand District Municipality, which NFP president Irvin Barnes told News24 would determine whether the NFP stayed in the GPU. Some NFP leaders believe they agreed to vote with the IFP to form a provincial government that would be led by the IFP in exchange for power in the uThukela and Zululand district municipalities. The IFP refused to allow the NFP to take over and instead elected a new IFP mayor in a municipality where both the IFP and ANC have 17 seats. Meanwhile, the ANC was also pressing the IFP to agree to a leadership change in Zululand that would allow its close ally, the NFP, to take over the reins, according to an ANC provincial executive committee member. COALITION NATION | NFP seeks non-MP Cabinet posts ahead of Ramaphosa's announcement The NFP has 10 seats, while the IFP and ANC both have 17 seats in the Zululand council. The NFP's infighting over the municipality "deal" is so serious its secretary-general, Nhlanhla Twala, has opened a criminal case against another leader after he was called a "bewitched donkey". Although the police did not respond to News24's query, we are in possession of police correspondence confirming the investigation. News24 reported recently that Barnes was tipped to become the mayor in Zululand, but this move was scuppered by the IFP in the council, which elected its leader, Michael Khumalo, in that position. NFP factions are fighting over seats in KwaZulu-Natal. (National Freedom Party/Facebook) Facebook Since then, letters have been exchanged between Barnes and the IFP leadership about the possibility of the NFP taking over the municipality, with IFP leaders, including Premier Thami Ntuli and IFP deputy president Inkosi Mzamo Buthelezi, promising to give Barnes a phone call. The IFP, at the weekend, moved to clarify that while its doors are open to negotiate with the NFP, no agreement to co-govern at a local government level has been reached. Addressing the media at the party's headquarters in Durban on Friday, IFP MP Mkhuleko Hlengwa said the party was committed to continuing to engage with its political partners in KwaZulu-Natal. On Wednesday night, Barnes told News24 he was not in a position to comment until he had received formal correspondence from the IFP. He said: The IFP's official response to us will determine whether we remain or pull out of the government of provincial unity. Meanwhile, Twala added the NFP was not in support of Barnes' wishes as the Zululand mayoral seat was not part of the GPU discussions at a provincial level. Barnes did not respond when Twala's statement was put to him. Twala sent News24 a statement claiming he had received a "threatening" voice note, which prompted him to open a criminal case against a Dannhauser Local Municipality politician who backed Barnes. Twala said: The comments were specifically about one individual who thinks that he's entitled to be the executive mayor of the Zululand District Municipality because of the NFP's one seat in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature. "It's very unfortunate that within our organisation we have individuals who believe that the wishes of the voters must be compromised and sacrificed in their pursuit of personal enrichment," he added. Twala said he had received expletive-laden voice notes from the politician, who called him "a bewitched donkey" that was hard of hearing, a reference to Twala's disability. "Considering the political climate in our province, it will be foolish for me to take the threats very lightly … it made me very concerned about my safety and also hurt about the reference to my hearing disability." He has opened a case of crimen injuria and intimidation against the Dannhauser politician, whose name is being withheld by News24.