US President Joe Biden has congratulated South Africa for the establishment of a government of national unity. Biden spoke to President Cyril Ramaphosa telephonically on Tuesday evening. He congratulated Ramaphosa on his re-election as state president. Biden said he would visit South Africa and participate in the G20 Summit meetings on home soil in 2025. US President Joe Biden has congratulated President Cyril Ramaphosa for "successfully forming" a government of national unity (GNU). In a statement released on Tuesday night, Biden also congratulated Ramaphosa on his re-election as the president of the seventh administration. Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya confirmed that the two statesmen had spoken on the phone on Tuesday night. During the call, Ramaphosa committed to deepen ties between South Africa and the West. Magwenya said: "President Cyril Ramaphosa and President Joe Biden have expressed their shared commitment to advancing the special relationship between the two countries. "President Biden phoned President Ramaphosa to congratulate him on his recent election and the successful formation of the government of national unity." READ | 'Keep it up,' Ramaphosa tells Biden after first black female Supreme Court justice appointed Magwenya added that Biden had committed to work with the seventh administration. "President Biden pledged that the United States will work closely with the 7th administration in South Africa on key areas, such as economic growth, job creation, social development, and climate change as well as South Africa's Presidency of the G20 in 2025. President Biden confirmed that he will visit South Africa and participate in the G20 meetings. "President Ramaphosa expressed his appreciation for this commitment and, in turn, extended an invitation to President Biden to undertake a state visit to South Africa." He said dates of the summit would be announced by the respective diplomatic teams. READ | A warming between SA and the US on the eve of BRICS Biden's office added: "The two leaders discussed South Africa's government of national unity and a commitment from all parties to work in partnership towards a growing economy, better jobs, safer communities, and a government that works for its people. They also discussed the US-South Africa bilateral relationship and areas of future partnership, including leadership in the G20. "Together, the United States and South Africa are committed to deepening our cooperation and advancing our shared interests, including growing economic prosperity, combating the climate crisis, strengthening health systems, and ensuring that democracy delivers for all our people." South Africa and the West have had strained relations for some time. The call, although not the first, could prove that Ramaphosa's decision to send special envoys to Washington regularly had yielded positive results. READ | Joe 'is the only person for the job': Biden reassures big-money donors after Trump debate debacle Pretoria and the West have been at odds with one another on various issues, such as the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict as well as the raging war between Israel and Palestine on the Gaza strip. Relations were also strained in May 2023 when the US ambassador to SA, Reuben Brigety, accused South Africa of supplying arms to Russia, using the Lady R cargo ship, which had docked in Simon's Town the previous December. South Africa was forced to re-emphasise its neutral stance on the Russia-Ukraine conflict. The Lady R saga also led to the politicisation of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) Summit, which was held in South Africa last year. During that meeting, leaders, including Ramaphosa, called for the extension and renewal of the agreement for another decade. The current format of AGOA is set to expire in 2025. South Africa also hosted a historic Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS) Summit last year, which saw the expansion of the bloc. Last year, South Africa led the charge against Israel - an ally of the West - in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and won. In 2025, South Africa is hosting the G20 Summit and will take over the Presidency from Brazil. The meeting brings together a group of 19 countries and the African Union. During the meeting, South Africa is expected to champion the aspirations of emerging markets, among other issues.