EFF leader Julius Malema has nothing to say about the explosive affidavit of former VBS Mutual Bank chairperson Tshifhiwa Matodzi. In the affidavit, Matodzi confirmed allegations that gratifications were paid to him and fellow EFF leader, Floyd Shivambu. EFF spokesperson Leigh-Ann Mathys said the media's "obsession" with the VBS scandal was "bordering on harassment". EFF leader Julius Malema says there is "nothing new" he can say about the leaked witness statement of VBS kingpin Tshifhiwa Matodzi, who, as part of an agreement, pleaded guilty to charges relating to his role in the R2-billion looting scheme. Pressed for comment on whether he had anything to say about what was contained in Matodzi's statement, whether the allegations were true, and if he intended to try to clear his name, he said: "There [is] nothing new. There is absolutely nothing new." "We spoke about VBS matters a long time ago. I even did a panel discussion with journalists. So, there is nothing more to say. Just refer to the archives.". READ | Seismic shift: VBS kingpin Tshifhiwa Matodzi's witness statements sink the 'rotten' ship for good EFF spokesperson Leigh-Ann Mathys also referred News24 to previous statements and said the media's "obsession" with the VBS scandal was "bordering on harassment". "There has been absolutely no change to our statements and position on VBS. There are endless archives, as you know, on this matter, so if you want a response, please refer to your archives. "How about you also allocate the same energy [spent] on [stories[ actually penned on VBS and double your energy on [President] Cyril Ramaphosa's illegal foreign currency that was hidden in mattresses and sofas at his Phala Phala farm." Mathys added: "This obsession of forcing EFF into VBS corruption is just plain down harassment now. We are busy with our 11th anniversary celebrations in Kimberly. Of national importance, we are fighting everything that we have against the white supremacist ANC and DA coalition that is circumventing parliamentary processes to pass the budget." News24 reported on Friday morning that Matodzi's affidavit confirmed that gratifications were paid to Malema and his colleague Floyd Shivambu and, shockingly, accuses former National Treasury director-general Dondo Mogojane of taking a payment of R1 million in exchange for not forcing municipalities to withdraw investments at the bank. On Wednesday, nearly four years after he was first arrested, Matodzi pleaded guilty to 33 charges of corruption, money laundering, theft, fraud, and racketeering. He was sentenced to 495 years but will serve 15 as the sentences for counts 2 to 33 have to be served concurrently. READ | Former Treasury DG Dondo Mogajane was paid R1m bribe, convicted VBS chairperson claims News24 reported that less than 48 hours after Matodzi pleaded guilty, his witness statement was leaked. The explosive affidavit confirms key findings made by advocate Terry Motau, who was hired by the Prudential Authority to investigate the affairs of VBS in 2018. The document in support of the plea deal started circulating on social media and was soon shared with journalists. It provides invaluable insights into the operations of VBS, and spells significant trouble for the remaining accused in the case. In March this year, the Hawks in Limpopo arrested municipal officials from the Greater Giyani Local Municipality, which had invested R148 million in VBS, in alleged contravention of municipal finance laws. In exchange for the deposits that VBS used to shore up its balances and hide the ever-growing hole in its books, municipal officials were allegedly paid gratifications. READ | 'I was desperate to be a big dog': The downfall of a VBS looter Fifteen municipalities, mostly in Limpopo, allegedly deposited more than R1.5 billion in the bank that was effectively operated as a Ponzi scheme. The directors and officers of the bank allegedly used the cash to fund luxury purchases for themselves, paid bribes to politicians and municipal officials and then lied to cover it up when questions over its liquidity were raised. In his 2018 report, The Great Bank Heist, Motau said the bank was "rotten to the core." Matodzi confirmed that the investigation and conclusion were accurate. Daily Maverick previously reported that in 2018, Malema used the beneficiary of Mahuna Investments' bank card to spend R900 000 on Gucci and Le Coq Sportif in Sandton City (R27 094), the Durban July (R30,860), the Hampshire Hotel in Ballito (R11 560), the Polokwane party venue Mekete Lodge (R416 900), and Nando's in Vryburg (R149). The report further stated that the R900 000 Malema spent during July 2018 from Mahuna Investments' business account at Absa is part of Malema's share of the loot – at least R5.3 million robbed from VBS Bank. In October 2023, News24 reported that although Parliament's ethics committee had made damning findings against Shivambu in connection with the VBS Mutual Bank scandal, Malema was spared the legislature's wrath. On 18 October 2019, DA leader John Steenhuisen referred a complaint to the committee about Malema's alleged involvement in the scandal. The complainant referred to a 2019 Daily Maverick report that claimed Malema benefitted from VBS funds through Mahuna Investments. In October 2019, advocate Anthea Gordon, the acting Registrar of Members' Interests, wrote to Malema to request a response to the allegations. The committee resolved to summon the liquidator in the VBS matter to furnish it with a report on the movement of money in the VBS scandal. READ | VBS liquidators gun for west rand municipal executive over his overdue SUV payments In August 2021, the liquidator's report was presented to the committee, and it was reported that Sgameka Projects Pty Ltd paid R4 803 180 into an ABSA bank account of Mahuna Investments. Subsequently, the committee could not make a breach finding because it was not in possession of sufficient information to make a finding and, therefore, decided to close the file in the matter. Shivambu failed to disclose three payments from the now-defunct VBS bank. Then-EFF national spokesperson, Sinawo Tambo, said the conclusion that Shivambu had received a donation that he had not declared was utterly false and not a reflection of reality. Shivambu did not respond to News24's questions. His comments will be added as soon as he responds.