The National Assembly Programming Committee has confirmed that President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address will take place on 18 July at 19:00 at the Cape Town City Hall. The delay in the appointment of Cabinet is causing a hold-up in the National Assembly Rules Committee appointing portfolio committees. This is while Parliament is legally required to pass the budget by the end of July. While President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address has been confirmed for 18 July at 19:00 at the Cape Town City Hall, the delayed announcement of his Cabinet is throwing a spanner in the works for the National Assembly to get fully going. The seventh Parliament's first National Assembly Programming Committee meeting took place on Friday morning, chaired by new Speaker Thoko Didiza. Secretary to the National Assembly Masibulele Xaso reminded the senior MPs that the Appropriation Bill – the budget – has to be passed by the end of July, as it is required by law to be passed four months after the start of the financial year. Before that happens, each budget vote – the budgets of each national department and entity – needs to be debated. This usually happens at mini-plenaries. Before that happens, the relevant portfolio committees would have processed the budget votes. But at the moment, the National Assembly has no committees. The National Assembly Rules Committee must constitute the committees. But this is dependent on which portfolios there are in Cabinet. The National Assembly Rules Committee is expected to do this next week, and Friday, 5 July, has been pencilled in for the election of the committee's chairpersons. The committees will then get cracking with the discussions on the budget votes the following Tuesday, 9 July. The mini-plenaries for the budget vote debates will start on 11 July. READ | How the delay in announcing the Cabinet is affecting Parliament's work Meanwhile, Ramaphosa has indicated that he wants to address a joint sitting of both Houses for the Opening of Parliament Address on 18 July. Xaso said this will take place at the Cape Town City Hall at 19:00. The debate on the opening address will take place the following day, from 10:00 to 20:00. Ramaphosa will respond on 22 July in the afternoon. In the morning, the National Assembly will debate Parliament's budget vote. On 23 July, Ramaphosa will deliver the Presidency's budget vote, followed by the debate. Ramaphosa will respond the following day. The National Assembly is expected to adopt the appropriations budget on 25 July, leaving the NCOP with days to process it. This coming Tuesday, the National Assembly will have a key plenary session at the Century City Convention Centre, where it will elect House chairpersons and delegations to, among other bodies, the Judicial Service Commission (JSC). The political component of the JSC was a bone of contention during the previous term, notably the actions of EFF leader Julius Malema. The first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, John Hlophe, is now the MK Party's parliamentary leader. While he said on Tuesday that the party hasn't yet decided on its deployments, he didn't rule out being on the JSC. The seventh Parliament's first "constituency period" will be from 29 July to 19 August.