The MK Party's John Hlophe will represent the National Assembly on the JSC, whose finding of gross misconduct against him led to his removal by the National Assembly. ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula said clarity was needed on the question of who constituted fit and proper MPs in relation to impeached office bearers. Several MPs also said a gap in the law allowing impeached persons to become MPs must be addressed. The delegation to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) of the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa - MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe - has highlighted gaps in laws on who is allowed to become an MP. In February, the National Assembly voted for Hlophe's removal following a gross misconduct finding against him by the JSC, following protracted litigation. However, Hlophe now leads the MK Party's caucus in the National Assembly and was its nominee for the House's delegation to the JSC. This nomination was accepted on Tuesday, with the DA, FF Plus, and ACDP's objections breaking from the parliamentary custom that parties did not object to other parties' nominations. Their arguments centred on the rationality of delegating someone who was found guilty of gross misconduct by the JSC to that same body. READ | Hlophe seconds: MK Party parliamentary leader elected to Judicial Service Commission The counterargument, as offered by the MK Party, EFF and others, was Hlophe was deemed fit and proper to be an MP and therefore had all the rights of an MP, including serving on the JSC. Section 89 of the Constitution, which deals with the removal of a president, states a removed president "may not serve in any public office". The first judge to be removed, John Hlophe, and the first Chapter 9 head to be removed, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, are now both members of the House that removed them, Hlophe as the MK Party's parliamentary leader and Mkhwebane as EFF MP. (Jan Gerber/ News24) News24 But section 77, which deals with the removal of judges, and section 194, which deals with the removal of Chapter 9 heads, has no such provision. Furthermore, section 47, which sets out the conditions for membership in the National Assembly, does not preclude removed judges or Chapter 9 heads. Section 47 precludes unrehabilitated insolvents, people declared of unsound mind by the courts and convicted criminals sentenced to more than 12 months' imprisonment without the option of a fine, like MK Party leader Jacob Zuma. However, the latter disqualification ends five years after the sentence has been completed, which is why PA leader Gayton McKenzie, who was released from prison in 2003 after serving a sentence for bank robbery, is allowed to be an MP. The ANC, which supported Hlophe's removal in February, did not object to his delegation to the JSC. Gayton Mckenzie. (Sharlene Rood/News24) News24 ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli said they respected the DA's concerns and objections about Hlophe but that when the Constitution was silent on a matter, parliamentary principles must be adhered to. "One of those principles is that parties must be permitted to second their own chosen members to specific portfolio committees. "That's one of the principles that we've established. It doesn't mean that there will not be a time where we can deal with that if there is a concern emanating from one of the parties who are representing the other party. "The parties have been engaging one another about what we understand as members of the seventh Parliament. We have agreed that until rules are amended otherwise, we are going to have to stay with the current convention and the rules of the national Parliament. "Our view is that notwithstanding the concern that has been raised by the DA on the short-term matter, we want to suggest that the House should not take a position unless it has clarified its own rules, whether there is lacuna or other rules." ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula subsequently took to X to further clarify the ANC's position, stating the party did not hold a brief for Hlophe or any other party. "The discontent about John Hlophe's nomination is valid and the ANC position on the JSC discussion in the House was not to say there is no basis for concern. "The real issue, which the chief whip expressed in word, is that the rules governing eligibility for membership of the House are moot on impeachment. "Once an impeached person is allowed to be a Member of Parliament, it is difficult to prevent their political party from nominating them. "What we need is clarification of the 'fit and proper' requirement in the current form of Section 47 of the Constitution. For instance, section 47[c] categorically rules out an insolvent person from being 'fit and proper' for parliamentary membership. "We therefore never have to worry about an 'unrehabilitated insolvent' being a member of the Appropriations Committee because none can even be in the House. "The same does not exist in legislation for the determination of the 'fit and proper' standard for the impeached. This is what the chief whip characterised as a lacuna in legislation. We have to solve it in section 47 as it was contemplated for financial prudence by barring unrehabilitated insolvents." ANALYSIS | Why the presence of Hlophe, Mkhwebane in Parliament makes case for electoral reform The issue of this lacuna (a gap in the law) was also raised when MPs delivered declarations of their vote on Tuesday. FF Plus chief whip Wouter Wessels said it was true the Constitution did not dictate and prescribe who a party might appoint to the JSC: But it is also true that we should be rational. It is also true that what the Honourable Shivambu said and what the honourable member from the MK Party said, that they did bring us a highly qualified person in the form of Dr Hlophe. "But what they do not mention, is that Dr Hlophe is also the first judge to have been removed from office, and that cannot be ignored. "That cannot be ignored, and then we should be rational. Then we should protect the integrity of the judicial system. Then we should protect the separation of powers," he added. "There is a void in the Constitution with regards to this and this should be addressed. A member cannot be impeached by this House, and then be fit and proper to serve in this House. ACDP MP Steve Swart also conceded there was not a "no legal impediment" to Hlophe's nomination. "As far as the ACDP is concerned, the prospects of a nominee who was removed from judicial office for gross misconduct sitting on the very body that made that finding, is in our view, plainly wrong. "The legal lacuna that exists needs to be addressed, either by constitutional or other legislative amendment to address this legal issue, this legal lacuna. In our view, it is ethically obvious. It is Ethics 101." Bosa leader Mmusi Maimane said: "I think this House would do well for itself to establish whether the rules are sufficient enough, that should a member be impeached [by] a particular portfolio committee, that same member can then proceed to go serve in the same portfolio committee in that sense." READ | 'Cruel irony': Hlophe's election to JSC to be challenged on grounds of rationality and rule of law Freedom Under Law (FUL) has subsequently indicated it would challenge Hlophe's delegation to the JSC on the grounds of rationality and the rule of law. While the MK Party continued with Hlophe's narrative his "only sin was to be appointed in the corrupt Western Cape High Court and holding the historically corrupt white monopoly capital to account", it was in fact his attempts to sway two Constitutional Court judges to rule in his now-party leader Zuma's favour in his long-running arms deal corruption case back in 2008, that led to the finding of gross misconduct against him. Hlophe is not the only office bearer removed by the National Assembly to now serve as a member of this House. Shortly after the National Assembly last year voted to remove Busisiwe Mkhwebane as the Public Protector due to misconduct and incompetence, she joined the EFF and became an MP. Like Hlophe, she now serves on the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development.