Several ANC MPs who will chair portfolio committees have stirred controversy in the past. Only five of the 29 portfolio committee chairperson posts went to the DA, with the ANC getting the remaining 24. The FF Plus, Rise Mzansi and non-GNU party BOSA obtained standing committee chairpersonships. As Parliament in a time of a government of national unity begins to take shape, there have been many changes, but one thing has remained constant: the ANC's election of committee chairpersons from among its most compromised members. In 2019, when the sixth Parliament elected its chairpersons, the DA railed against what it called the "rogues gallery", that the ANC wanted to preside over the committees overseeing the executive. It did not support the ANC's candidates and nominated its own. But in 2024, on the back of the formation of the GNU, the ANC and DA backed each other when it came to the election of portfolio committee chairpersons. For instance, on Wednesday when the Portfolio Committee on Police had its first meeting, long-serving DA MP Dianne Kohler Barnard nominated newcomer DA MP Ian Cameron as the chairperson. READ | From Digital Vibes to Cogta vibes: Zweli Mkhize now leads oversight of SA's municipalities ANC MP David Plaatjies seconded the nomination and no other candidate was proposed. Such a sequence of events would have been unheard of in previous parliaments. The upshot is that five DA MPs have been elected among the 30 portfolio committee chairpersons. Committee chairs News24 They are joining the ranks of some of the ANC's most controversial figures. On Wednesday, former health minister Zweli Mkhize was elected the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Mkhize was pushed to resign as President Cyril Ramaphosa's health minister in 2021, during the deadly, global Covid-19 pandemic, amid allegations that he had benefited from a tender his department had awarded to a company called Digital Vibes, where two of his associates were in charge. He remained an ANC backbencher, and unsuccessfully challenged Ramaphosa for the ANC's leadership in 2022. More recently, before the formation of the GNU, he has been vibing with Jacob Zuma's MK Party, expressing in an op-ed for City Press that it is his preferred coalition partner for the ANC. Former Ramaphosa spokesperson, Khusela Sangoni, was elected chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Communications and Digital Technologies on Tuesday. Sangoni went on "special leave" from her post as Ramaphosa's spokesperson in June 2020 following a personal protective equipment (PPE) corruption scandal involving her late husband, amaBhaca chief Thandisizwe Diko. He secured PPE tender from the Gauteng health department to the tune of R125 million. The Special Investigating Unit (SIU) found that the tender was irregular and unlawful. In August 2021, a disciplinary process into her failure to disclose her financial interests in companies, as required by public service regulations, was completed and she was served with a written warning for this offence and her suspension was reversed. However, she did not resume her duties as Ramaphosa's spokesperson, but moved to a different position in the public service. In 2022, she was elected to the ANC's provincial executive committee in Gauteng. Former communications minister Dina Pule delivers a speech at Bosasa offices in this undated photograph. (Supplied) Supplied Here's a blast from the past: Zuma fired Dina Pule from his Cabinet in 2013. This was after erstwhile Public Protector Thuli Madonsela found in a damning report titled "Unsolicited Donations" that Pule had violated the Executive Members' Ethics Act. Pule used funds donated for a state function to the benefit of herself and her boyfriend. She had allowed her office to be captured by her boyfriend, a businessman with whom she had enjoyed expensive trips abroad at taxpayers' expense. Parliament's ethics committee also found against her, and she had to apologise to the National Assembly. She made it onto the ANC's list to Parliament in the 2014 elections, but withdrew her candidature. This year, she was back on the list and was re-elected to the National Assembly, where she will be overseeing the portfolio of DA leader John Steenhuisen as the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture. Mzwandile Masina, the mayor of Ekurhuleni from 2016 to 2021, was elected chairperson of the Portfolio Committee of Trade, Industry and Competition. Masina was implicated in a R1.6-billion toilet tender that supplied poorly built toilets to communities. Masina denied any involvement in the scandal. He served as the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry in Zuma's executive. On Wednesday, News24 reported that other controversial ANC figures, such as Supra Mahumapelo, Sibongiseni Dhlomo, and Joe Maswanganyi were also elected to chair portfolio committees. It is notable that not one of the portfolio committees chaired by DA MPs - police (Cameron), social development (Bridget Masango), public service and administration (Jan de Villiers), sport, arts and culture (Joe McGluwa), and water and sanitation (Leon Basson) - has a minister from the DA. Former Ekhuruleni Mayor Mzwandile Masina denied involvement in a R1.6-billion toilet tender. (OJ Koloti/Gallo Images) Gallo Images DA chief whip George Michalakis said Wednesday: "Our representatives will uphold the highest standards of accountability, transparency, and service to the people of South Africa." Only one portfolio committee - science and technology - is yet to elect its chairperson. This means that the DA, which has 87 seats, has only five chairpersons, while the ANC, which has 159 seats, has 24 chairpersons - almost five times as many as the DA, which has more than half the number of seats that the ANC has. While the other GNU parties do not chair any portfolio committees, the FF Plus's Wouter Wessels will chair the Standing Committee on the Auditor-General and Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) - a key watchdog committee. While not required by the National Assembly's rules, the Scopa chairperson has traditionally gone to an opposition party. Rise Mzansi is part of the GNU - the governing coalition. Last week, ActionSA indicated that it would like its parliamentary leader, Athol Trollip, to chair Scopa. In a statement released after Zibi's election, Trollip said it "marks a troubling departure from our own National Assembly and international best practice". "The multiparty government now clearly wishes to exercise oversight over itself by deploying one of its own to head up this critical oversight committee." "Scopa is one of the committees most critical to the force and effect of oversight over the public purse and the performance of government. This position, now being gifted to a member of the multi-party government/GNU which already commands a 70% majority in Parliament, serves to potentially neuter effective oversight over government expenditure and outcomes-related performance," said Trollip. Rise Mzansi whip Makashule Gana said Scopa was "one of the most critical committees in Parliament in ensuring that the people's money is accounted for, and that executive and organs of state are held accountable". Gana said: Scopa must protect the public by being a vigilant watchdog that acts without fear, favour or prejudice. "Scopa now has a new leader who will work with and for the people of South Africa to ensure that money is spent and accounted for in the pursuit of building a safe, prosperous, equal and united South Africa." It is also remarkable that the only returning member to Scopa is the EFF's Veronica Mente, who has served on the committee since the fifth Parliament. Despite not being part of the GNU, BOSA leader Mmusi Maimane was elected chairperson of the Standing Committee on Appropriations. Maimane said he would ensure the committee performs in its responsibility to provide both oversight of the way the government spends public money, and hold any wrongdoers accountable. This means that an unprecedented five parties have committee chairpersons in the National Assembly. Former Ekhuruleni Mayor Mzwandile Masina denied involvement in a R1.6-billion toilet tender. (OJ Koloti/Gallo Images) Gallo Images This political plurality is also reflected in the National Assembly's House chairpersons. The ANC's Cedric Frolick was re-elected on Tuesday, together with the DA's Werner Horn and the IFP's Zandile Majozi. Last week, Mahumapelo's name was on the order paper, instead of Horn's. But that was among the motions ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli withdrew for further consultation. Frolick was House chairperson for committees, or chair of chairs the previous two terms. ANC MP Cedric Frolick is among four MPs found to have not breached Parliament's ethics code over their their involvement with state capture players. (Papi Morake/Gallo Images) Gallo Images In the fifth Parliament, Cedric Frolick chaired the two sham ad hoc committees that found Zuma didn't have to pay a dime for the "security upgrades" to his homestead in Nkandla, and that Zuma's swimming pool was indeed a security feature, the infamous "fire pool". Frolick was also mentioned by the Zondo Commission. The commission found that Frolick "sought to assist Bosasa [to] resolve its impasse" with former ANC MP Vincent Smith, who chaired the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services at the time. The commission found this improved Bosasa's "relations with a parliamentary oversight body that was concerning itself with allegations of irregularities in the award of contracts to Bosasa". Smith and former Bosasa COO Angelo Agrizzi are already facing criminal charges related to corruption around Bosasa. The commission recommended that Frolick be investigated for possible corruption. Parliament's ethics committee has cleared Frolick. While the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will only elect its committee chairpersons on Thursday and Friday, its leadership also sees a marked change from the previous years' ANC dominance. The IFP's Poobalan Govender was elected unopposed as the NCOP deputy chairperson. The NCOP also elected the DA's Dennis Ryder as the House chairperson for Committees and Oversight, and the ANC's Bheki Radebe as the House chairperson for International Relations and Members’ Support. Radebe was the House whip in the fifth and sixth Parliament, and as such had to raise objections to protect the presidents and ministers, often to the annoyance of the EFF, who nicknamed him "German cut" - a reference to his hairstyle.