Chaos erupted at a special council meeting in Knysna on Friday, leading the DA caucus to exit the session. The meeting was abruptly scheduled, providing council members with minimal preparation time. The DA has threatened to remove the speaker through a motion of no confidence. Chaos broke out during a Knysna special council meeting on Friday, prompting the DA caucus to leave. The sitting was called at the eleventh hour, giving members little time to prepare. The agenda was only received at around 15:49 on Thursday, and did not include relevant attachments of the items to be discussed. Various items were to be discussed, including correspondence from Local Government MEC Anton Bredell and the appointment of a new municipal manager. The municipality wants to advertise a position as a director for integrated human settlements and a director for infrastructure services. READ | DA Knysna councillor under fire for 'monkey circus' remark During the council meeting, Knysna Independent Movement (KIM) councillor Susan Campbell objected to the advertisement. "We have not even reviewed our organisational review in terms of the staff regulations. "In fact, I don't know what has been going on in this council since 2022 because it was supposed to be already done back then," she said during the meeting. DA councillors lashed out at the council, saying taxpayers' money would be wasted through the process without a municipal manager. During the meeting, Deputy Mayor Alberto Marbi said he was "shocked to hear from the DA and KIM". He added: The DA and KIM had a director when they were in charge. Now, when we are in charge, they come with excuses. These parties were part of the selection process and they wanted to be part of it. A screaming match ensued, and eventually, DA councillor Sharon Sabbagh requested the party be excused from the sitting. However, council speaker Mncedisi Skosana insisted proceedings should continue. The DA was fuming and threatened to bring a motion of no confidence in the speaker. DA caucus chairperson for Knysna Jason White said: "During the meeting, the DA caucus requested crucial supplementary details to deliberate and provide recommendations to council properly. White added: Regrettably, the speaker denied this request, preventing the caucus from fulfilling its duty effectively. Consequently, the DA sought permission from the speaker to leave the meeting. "It is critical to underscore that the ANC/PA/PBI/EFF coalition of corruption habitually calls meetings under such inadequate and grossly unfair conditions, disregarding transparency and procedural fairness," White said. "In light of this, the DA caucus is strongly considering submitting a motion of no confidence to remove councillor Skosana as speaker – we are aware that such a motion might get support from within the coalition of corruption." The Knysna Municipality is governed by a shaky coalition between the ANC, EFF, Patriotic Alliance (PA) and Plaaslike Besorgde Inwoners. A DA coalition previously led it with the PA, but the latter pulled out of the agreement last year.