Pemmy Majodina is the new water and sanitation minister. She had previously been an Eastern Cape MEC in different portfolios. Eastern Cape villagers asked Majodina to ensure safe water supply in rural areas. Eastern Cape residents have high hopes that the new Water and Sanitation Minister Pemmy Majodina will ensure access to safe water and also eradicate pit latrines. President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed the former ANC chief whip when he unveiled his government of national unity Cabinet on Sunday evening. Majodina replaces Senzo Mchunu, who is now the police minister. Majodina's ANC colleague, Mlibo Qoboshiyane, said they had worked together in the Eastern Cape Cabinet for eight years. "She is energetic and oozing with great passion for her assigned responsibilities. Having worked close to her as an MEC, I realised that she is deeply touched by community concerns," said Qoboshiyane. READ | Partner with private sector, government tells municipalities battling with water supply issues Qoboshiyane said he had no doubt that she would excel in her new portfolio. "The issue of water is a human rights issue, and water is life. Her diligence will be to ensure there is universal coverage for all - urban and rural. "She will have to work closely with engineers, water scientists, water specialists and provincial water forums and municipalities and communities to ensure that bulk and reticulation are effective and efficient. "Lastly, water education, youth water clubs, schools' participation in water conservation debates and composition will add value. I trust that she will also work with the water boards and support them." The Eastern Cape's Senqu Local Municipality, where Majodina was born, said in a statement that her appointment was "well-deserved". "We take immense pride in her accomplishments, especially considering that Minister Majodina originates from our very own Senqu Local Municipality and wish her every success in this crucial role." READ MORE | Senzo Mchunu a massive loss to water ministry as former ANC chief whip Pemmy Majodina takes over The Water Research Commission said Majodina would bring "much-needed energy and experience to add strong impetus to the endeavours that aim to bring decent and dignified water and sanitation services to all South Africans". Eastern Cape residents wanted the new minister to bring dignity to the people of the province. An Eastern Cape father, whose son died after drowning in a pit latrine, called on Majodina to urgently eradicate dangerous pit latrines. Unecebo Mboteni, 3, died in East London's Frere Hospital on 19 April after he fell into a pit toilet at the Little Champions Day Care Centre in Mdantsane on 18 April. "We still have many pit toilets across the Eastern Cape. Can the new minister make sure that pit toilets are a thing of the past?" Unecebo's father, Loyiso Mboteni, asked. Two months after the incident, Mboteni said the family was still traumatised. He added: On Friday, I had deep thoughts about my son and the circumstances that led to his death. I cried because what happened to my son was not supposed to happen in the first place. "As a family, we have lost our son, but this does not mean that we no longer care if pit toilets are eradicated or not. Let the new minister deal with this issue once and for all. "My son's incident was not the first to happen in the Eastern Cape and my fear is that it might not be the last." In March 2023, Langalam Viki, 3, died after drowning in a pit toilet at Glen Grey Primary School in Vaalbank, near Komani, in the Eastern Cape. Reliable and safe water supply A community activist, Zamekile Zodala, of Tyekelebende Village in Dutywa, called on Majodina to ensure that communities had a reliable and safe water supply. "I am from a village that is yet to see how clean tap water tastes. Piping for taps was done in December 2013, but not even a single drop of water is in the taps. Our main source of water is still the rivers. "We have tried numerous times to get answers as to why we don't have a safe water supply in our village, but to no avail. The situation is worse when there is drought because we are forced to compete with animals for the murky water in the river," said Zodala. A community leader, Leonard Ncumbese, said that, in 2023, he received a number of complaints from more than 15 communities of the Alfred Nzo District Municipality because they had to fetch dirty water from the rivers. ALSO READ | Cape Town infrastructure budget is now 80% bigger than Joburg's, with a massive push into water, sewers "After a number of messages and phone calls to municipality officials, the issue is yet to be to be resolved," said Ncumbese. "We urge you, Minister Majodina, to intervene in this matter and, hopefully, you will inform us of what's going to happen to help these 15 communities - and to make sure they at least get clean water delivered to them," said Ncumbese. Attempts to get comment from Majodina, were unsuccessful. Majodina's record in public office spans more than three decades. In 1994, she was elected as a member of the National Council of Provinces. In 2004, she was appointed chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Roads and Public Works in the Eastern Cape Legislature. From 2008 to 2019, Majodina led four different portfolios as MEC in the Eastern Cape: health, roads and public works, social development, and sports, recreation, arts and culture. READ | Court orders eThekwini to restore services to residents who refuse to pay for 'free water' However, her stint in government was not without hiccups. In 2021, former ANC MP Mervyn Dirks claimed the party's constituency office in the National Assembly awarded a personal protective equipment tender to supply thermometers worth R52 500 to a company owned by Majodina's son, Thandolwethu Mkhonto we-Sizwe Majodina. The matter was reported to the Office of the Public Protector. In January 2023, then Acting Public Protector Kholeka Gcaleka referred the matter to the Hawks. In her findings, Gcaleka ordered the National Assembly to take appropriate steps to pass regulations concerning the allocation and use of any funds provided by Parliament to political parties or Members of Parliament, as envisaged in the Financial Management of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act. Also, in April 2015, former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela ordered Majodina to pay R15 000 back to the Eastern Cape social development department, which was the amount more than the normal subsistence and travel allowance she was given for her official trip to New York in 2012. Majodina paid the money back.