The EFF says it is willing to work with the ANC to form a government of national unity, provided it keeps the DA and FF Plus out. In a letter to ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula, the EFF proposed that a new statement of intent be drawn up. The communication comes amid talks to form a GNU and a delayed Cabinet announcement. The EFF has expressed its desire to co-govern with the ANC, provided that the ANC keeps the DA and FF Plus out. The announcement comes after a meeting held on Friday at Inanda Country Club in Johannesburg about the formation of the seventh administration. "The EFF is willing to constitute and participate in an ANC-led government together with other parties, with the exception of the Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus," the party said on Saturday. In a four-page letter, dated 29 June, EFF secretary-general Marshall Dlamini told his counterpart, ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula, that his party was committed to the rule of law, supremacy of the Constitution, anti-corruption, accountability and transparency. The letter comes amid talks to form a government of national unity and a delayed Cabinet announcement after the ANC lost its majority in the 2024 general elections. There has been significant back and forth in negotiations between the ANC and DA over Cabinet posts, including threats by the DA to walk away. However, fresh talks between DA leader John Steenhuisen and President Cyril Ramaphosa took place on Friday afternoon. Dlamini says that based on the ANC and EFF's 2024 election manifestos, they could "co-govern and hit the ground running". READ | 'A deal will be found' as Ramaphosa and Steenhuisen meet to mend GNU cracks The EFF said it fielded candidates in the first sitting of Parliament on 14 June for the position of national Speaker, deputy Speaker and president as a form of "disapproval of an ANC, DA alliance". Explaining why the party was against working with the DA and the FF Plus, Dlamini said the parties represented the "imperialist, counter-revolutionary, white supremacist agenda". Dlamini reminded the ANC that the DA wrote to the United States of America asking for it to observe the elections, a move it believes "undermined our sovereignty and insulted our collective intelligence as a country". The EFF also believes that the participation of the DA and FF Plus in the GNU "neutralises" the possibility of economic transformation. READ | COALITION NATION: GNU talks back on track, but IFP urges ANC, DA to speed things up The party proposed that a new agreement or statement of intent between the ANC and EFF be drawn up – essentially, the ANC should dump its GNU partners and enter into a coalition with the EFF. Dlamini said, "Such an agreement or statement of intent must necessarily include key principles informed by the strategic objective of the total liberation of the oppressed as encapsulated in the Freedom Charter and progressive internationalism. "The agreement, or statement of intent, must also necessarily include the principles of redress and equality as captured in Section 9.2 of the Constitution, which states that 'to promote the achievement of equality, legislative and other measures designed to protect or advance persons, or categories of persons, disadvantaged by unfair discrimination may be taken'". Dlamini further said that the agreement must translate into provincial and municipal governments with the aim of government stability and accelerated quality service delivery. Dlamini added: We give our assurance and guarantee that we shall never work with the DA in any sphere of government to remove the ANC from power where it is elected as leader of the executive or legislature. "We are willing to participate in any executive as long as the DA and FF Plus are not included and affirm the principle that the president and or premiers have the prerogative to determine the composition of the executive after consultation with the EFF leadership." Dlamini said the EFF opposed a deal where ministers and departments were not accountable to the executive. "We nonetheless express our desire to find representation in all the clusters of national government, as ministers or deputies. We also are willing to take leadership in legislatures in the form of Speaker or deputy speakers, and chairpersons of portfolio committees. READ | 'No crisis, agreements must be reached on a win-win': IFP calls on DA, ANC to conclude GNU talks "We would like to state that we are not on the mission to pursue Cabinet positions for careerist purposes. We seek participation that will bring meaningful and historic change to the lives of the oppressed and the people of South Africa as a whole." Dlamini appealed to the ANC to consider its proposal, warning of a "soft coup" that could undo "historic gains". "We conclusively advise that the ANC must not work or co-govern with the DA and FF Plus in the interest of its historic mission. This, the ANC must do, even if it believes that the EFF is not its preferred partner," said Dlamini.