Talks between the ANC and DA are on the skids again, after an offer of the trade and industry post was revoked. A letter by President Cyril Ramaphosa to DA leader John Steenhuisen on Tuesday revealed deep frustration over the back and forth between the two parties. Two weeks after his election as president, Ramaphosa is yet to announce a Cabinet. Shifting the goalposts, wilful misinterpretations and backtracking on handing the DA the crucial trade and industry department bedevilled talks between the opposition party and ANC to form a national government of unity (GNU) this week. ANC officials, including Deputy President Paul Mashatile and chairperson Gwede Mantashe, pushed back against the DA receiving the trade and industry portfolio, with broad concern over the impact handing it over would have on BEE, transformation and redress. This was behind President Cyril Ramaphosa backtracking on offering it to the opposition party. By Thursday night, South Africa remained in limbo and without a Cabinet as the ANC and DA clashed over crucial principles agreed to in the statement of intent signed two weeks ago, which culminated in Ramaphosa's election as president. The DA was threatening to walk away from the deal, while the ANC was gearing up to form a government without it - with parties that could help it cross the line in Parliament on confidence motions and to pass budgets. Negotiations over the last week have exposed the vast chasm between the two political parties and provided a glimpse of the difficulty they will have working together going forward. On the other hand, the deal falling through will have a lasting negative impact not only on the national government but also on the two provinces with the largest economies, Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal, and on metros and municipalities across the country. The ANC's backtracking on Wednesday night on an offer to hand the DA the trade and industry department saw the DA threaten to walk away from the negotiating table. Its demand for proportional representation - which it calculated amounted to 10 ministerial posts, according to its first response to an offer of three posts - was also a source of irritation for ANC negotiators and Ramaphosa. This was revealed in a letter to DA leader John Steenhuisen, which was leaked on Thursday. The DA positively received the ANC's final offer of six posts, including crucial portfolios such as trade and industry, basic education, home affairs, and public works, along with four deputy ministries, including finance, on Monday. But Steenhuisen wrote back to Ramaphosa, demanding two additional ministerial posts and two additional deputy minister posts. In response, Ramaphosa, in a terse letter on Tuesday, accused the DA of "moving the goalposts", wanting to form a "parallel government" operating outside the "framework and parameters" of the current Constitution-based method and protocols of running the state, and wilfully misinterpreting the statement of intent. Cracks begin to show He also described the DA's demand for reviewing the contracts of directors-general and tenders agreed to as "legally incompetent". READ | Rand plunges after DA threatens to walk away from GNU A day later, Ramaphosa, in a telephone call to Steenhuisen, backtracked on his offer of the trade and industry portfolio to the DA. This after an intense disagreement arose over handing over the post to the DA in a meeting of the ANC's top officials. Multiple sources indicated officials, including Mashatile and Mantashe, disagreed with handing over the key economic portfolio. Disagreement was not, however, limited to ANC officials. Its allies, a black business lobby and the department itself opposed it. A high-level official in the department told News24 on Thursday: "There is a strong view that the DTI [Department of Trade and Industry] is at the heart of the government's transformation agenda, handing it to a party whose policies are against crucial aspects of that agenda such as BBBEE and affirmative action is outrageous. "This department holds the majority of the levers of transformation; we cannot simply hand them over to a party whose own policies shun transformation." The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said agencies such as the National Empowerment Fund fell under the DTI. The DTI provides financial assistance to black businesses through the Black Industrialists Fund and Industrial Development Corporation, which could be placed at risk under a DA minister. "What confuses us is why the DA would even want the DTI when among its very objectives is to ensure the implementation of BBBEE across the economy, and this conflicts with its own stated policies, what an audacity," another senior ANC source told News24. By late Thursday, the DA was meeting to decide on the way forward, while the ANC was adamant it would not budge on refusing to hand the DTI to the DA. The impasse on Wednesday was the most severe to bedevil the talks, and the cracks began showing in Ramaphosa's letter on Tuesday. In it, he complained the DA's preferred method of negotiation, through written correspondence, was problematic and resulted in leaks and negotiating through public opinion instead of genuine interaction. 'Sealed mandates' Ramaphosa also wrote that he and the ANC found DA federal council chairperson Helen Zille's letter making demands on preferences for ministerial posts, on the appointment of directors-general and on reviewing procurement contracts, "offensive, condescending, and inconsistent with the Constitution". He accused Steenhuisen of shifting the goalposts after the ANC presented a final offer of six key Cabinet portfolios, and the DA came back demanding eight. READ | COALITION NATION: DA to tell Ramaphosa the deal is off unless he sticks to original offer Ramaphosa then rounded on the DA and accused the party of wanting to set up a "parallel government", which would be illegal. "I regard your approach in moving the goalposts as a continuation of what was articulated in your federal chair's letter of 22 June 2024 on issues such as 'sealed mandates' of ministries, through which the DA seemed to want to set up a parallel government that would operate outside the framework and parameters of the Constitution-based method and protocols of running the government of the Republic of South Africa," he said. "I also prefer not to deal further with the legally incompetent proposals to unilaterally re-determine contractual arrangements of director generals and other contracts. "I did inform you that I felt we should not dwell on the misguided propositions contained in that letter as paying attention to the contents of that letter would divert us from the task at hand of constituting a government of national unity." Ramaphosa also clarified to Steenhuisen that the statement of intent, which was signed by parties to establish the GNU, did not specify that Cabinet posts should be assigned in proportion to a party's electoral performance, which the DA had used to argue for more positions. In the letter, he emphasised the urgency of setting up a government - and informed Steenhuisen he was open to further discussion.