GNU talks between the DA and ANC are at breaking point. The DA is set to walk after the ANC withdrew the Trade and Industry post. Ramaphosa bemoaned the DA's attitude during the negotiations. President Cyril Ramaphosa has written a scathing letter to DA leader John Steenhuisen, accusing him of "moving the goalposts" in negotiations with the ANC and wanting to set up an illegal "parallel government", which would operate outside the parameters of the Constitution. News24 has seen the letter, penned on 25 June. Talks to form a government of national unity (GNU) have hit another major hurdle, with tension between the ANC and the DA again deepening after the party demanded an additional two Cabinet posts. The letter was written after the ANC had made a final offer of six Cabinet posts. The DA then demanded two further posts, which News24 understands has angered Ramaphosa and ANC negotiators. Ramaphosa then opted to withdraw a crucial post - Trade and Industry - from the DA's initial offer, in response to the DA's earlier comeback. Ramaphosa's letter to Steenhuisen, in his capacity as ANC president, begins by admonishing the opposition leader for insisting on conducting negotiations through written correspondence. Ramaphosa writes: Matters of national importance, such as these, are best conducted in face-to-face negotiations and only when both sides agree that the discussions between them have reached a level of maturity and advance should they be reduced to writing, to live up to the principle of transparency. He noted that this could result in media leaks and parties "playing to the gallery of public opinion", instead of holding good-faith negotiations. Ramaphosa said he found a letter of demand by the DA's federal executive council chairperson, Helen Zille, to be "offensive, condescending and inconsistent with the Constitution". He accused Steenhuisen of shifting the goalposts after the ANC presented a final offer of six key Cabinet portfolios, and the DA came back demanding eight. He then rounded on the DA and accused the party of wanting to set up a "parallel government", a move that would be illegal. "I regard your approach in moving the goalposts as a continuation of what was articulated in your Federal Chair's letter of 22 June 2024 on issues such as 'sealed mandates' of Ministries, through which the DA seemed to want to set up a parallel government that would operate outside the framework and parameters of the Constitution-based method and protocols of running the government of the Republic of South Africa. "I also prefer not to deal further with the legally incompetent proposals to unilaterally re-determine contractual arrangements of directors-general and other contracts. I did inform you that I felt we should not dwell on the misguided propositions contained in that letter as paying attention to the contents of that letter would divert us from the task at hand of constituting a government of national unity." READ | COALITION NATION: DA to tell Ramaphosa the deal is off unless he sticks to original offer Ramaphosa also clarified to Steenhuisen that the statement of intent, which was signed by parties to establish the GNU, did not specify that Cabinet posts should be assigned in proportion to a party's electoral performance, which the DA had used to argue for more positions. "Clause 16 of the statement of intent makes plain that the government of national unity shall be constituted in a manner that reflects genuine inclusiveness of all the political parties that are party to the statement of intent and are represented in the National Assembly broadly taking into account [my emphasis] the number of seats parties have in the National Assembly and the need to advance the national interest. "The clause further provides that the president shall, in constituting the executive, take into account the electoral outcomes. These commitments are set out in full appreciation of the president retaining discretion to constitute the Cabinet – a prerogative I believe I have duly and sufficiently tempered to fulfil the commitment of the statement of intent," Ramaphosa wrote. In the letter, Ramaphosa emphasised the urgency of setting up a government - and informed Steenhuisen that he was open to further discussion. This is a developing story.