President Cyril Ramaphosa is expected to announce his Cabinet soon. The anticipation around his announcement is heightened by the jostling for positions from parties involved in the GNU talks. The NFP, which doesn't have a seat nationally, but plays a crucial role in the GNU in KwaZulu-Natal, has asked the ANC for "one or two" seats in the executive. NFP president Irvin Barnes claims that the ANC has agreed, "in principle", to giving his party either one or two Cabinet positions in the GNU, despite it not having a seat in Parliament. According to Chapter 5's Section 91 (3) of the Constitution, President Cyril Ramaphosa bears the prerogative power to appoint no more than two ministers from outside the National Assembly. News24 understands that one of those positions is likely to go to former international relations minister Naledi Pandor, who has indicated that she would step down. However, she is understood to remain the president's preference for the post. Though the NFP failed to win a single seat nationally, the party is key to the ANC holding some portfolios in KwaZulu-Natal and has also played a crucial role in forming the provincial government of unity (PGU) in KwaZulu-Natal. The NFP's revelation that it asked for the two positions nationally comes as ANC leaders accuse the DA of trying to strong-arm the ANC into giving it positions. READ | COALITION NATION: NFP president looks set to be appointed Zululand mayor as part of GNU agreement News24, citing sources close to the Presidency, reported that President Ramaphosa is expected to announce his inclusive GNU Cabinet soon. A source close to Ramaphosa, who is not authorised to speak to the media, confirmed that the president was expected to make the all-important Cabinet announcement this week. However, further developments around a stalemate with the DA may delay the announcement. The Cabinet was dissolved when Ramaphosa was inaugurated last week. Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya has pleaded for patience as Ramaphosa makes the final touches to his list. Barnes said: We did submit a proposal to the IFP and the ANC – and that's left in the prerogative of the president – that was saying the president can appoint two people outside of the National Assembly. We submitted a proposal to that effect. And the ANC did agree to it, in principle, and we're waiting for that consideration as to how they're going to strategically locate the NFP at national level. He said this and other issues were still outstanding. Pressed further on his demand and whether the NFP asked for one of the positions or both, Barnes said the party said "either or" in their submission to ANC negotiators. ANC spokesperson Mahlengi Bhengu-Motsiri didn't respond to News24's request for comment. ALSO READ | COALITION NATION: How NFP made last-minute GNU pick while Zuma's candidates fight over lists Barnes is also tipped to take over the Zululand mayoral position, which is held by the NFP, but IFP spokesperson Mkhuleko Hlengwa said there was "no agreement on local government" between the two parties. "We have noticed that there is a stumbling block between the ANC and the DA, and that cannot delay us at local government since we have pieces of commonality at local government," Barnes said. Meanwhile, speaking to News24 on Wednesday, IFP deputy president Inkosi Mzamo Buthelezi said the party made no demands for portfolios in its negotiations with the ANC.