Former president Jacob Zuma and former Speaker Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula have been invited to the Opening of Parliament Address (OPA) on Thursday, but it's unclear whether they will attend. OPA differs from a State of the Nation Address (SONA) in that the president is expected to deliver a speech about the coming five-year term, while a SONA should focus on the year ahead. The ceremonial aspect is similar to that of a SONA. Former president Jacob Zuma and former Speaker Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, both facing corruption charges in court, have been invited to attend the Opening of Parliament Address (OPA) on Thursday. But by early afternoon on Wednesday, it was unclear whether either have accepted the invitation, which Parliament extended to them along with former presidents Thabo Mbeki and Kgalema Motlanthe, and former deputy presidents and Speakers. Asked whether Zuma and Mapisa-Nqakula would attend, National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza on Wednesday, at a media briefing on Parliament's readiness for the OPA, said Parliament was still waiting for responses to the invitations. "Unfortunately, I'm not able to say. Sorry to disappoint," she said with a smile. "We'll see tomorrow [Thursday]." Zuma is standing trial on arms deal corruption-related charges dating back to the early 2000s. The party he now leads, the MK Party, is represented as the third-biggest party in the National Assembly, with 58 seats. Several MK Party MPs in the past week's budget vote debates referred to Zuma as the "real" or "rightful" president of South Africa, even though he is disqualified from another term as he already served two, and is ineligible to be a member of the National Assembly, from which the president is elected, on account of being a convicted criminal. Mapisa-Nqakula, Didiza's direct predecessor, resigned in April when she had to appear in court on corruption charges, stemming from her time as defence minister. READ | ID dismisses imminent arrest claims against ANC's Gwede Mantashe Didiza described OPA as a significant event in South Africa's democratic process, even more so this year as we celebrate 30 years of democracy, as it is one of the few occasions where all three arms of state - the executive, legislature and judiciary - are together under one roof. The OPA also takes place on Nelson Mandela Day, which Didiza described as "a day of great importance which resonates with Parliament's commitment to the ideals of democracy, freedom, equality, and service to humanity". In November last year, new rules for joint sittings - when both the National Assembly and National Council of Provinces (NCOP) meet together - were adopted. These rules draw a distinction between the OPA and the annual State of the Nation Address (SONA). "The Opening of Parliament Address serves as a pivotal platform for the president to articulate the administration's comprehensive plans and long-term vision for the upcoming five-year term," said Didiza. "This landmark event not only outlines the government's strategic objectives and policy priorities but also officially inaugurates the new parliamentary term. It symbolises the continuity of democratic governance and sets the stage for legislative and executive collaboration in addressing national challenges and pursuing the country's development goals. "The State of the Nation Address, delivered annually by the president in February, serves as a platform to review the government's past-year performance and outline its agenda for the coming year." READ | Take note of these Cape Town road closures ahead of Opening of Parliament Address Furthermore, the joint rules also aim to maintain order and decorum in the chamber during joint sittings. Last year's SONA, also a joint sitting, was marred by EFF members storming the podium as President Cyril Ramaphosa was addressing the Houses. "Key provisions of the new rules prohibit members from interrupting the president during the Opening of Parliament Address and further stipulate that this joint sitting must focus solely on the specific business for which it is convened," said Didiza. "These measures are designed to preserve the dignity of Parliament and underscore the importance of these addresses in shaping the nation's legislative and developmental agenda." As the National Assembly will only be reconstructed by April 2026, OPA will take place at the Cape Town City Hall at 19:00. "This venue has been selected in terms of our cost-containment measures and also due to its capacity to accommodate all members of Parliament from both Houses," said Didiza. NCOP chairperson Refilwe Mtsweni-Tsipane, National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza and Secretary to Parliament Xolile George at a briefing on the Opening of Parliament Address (OPA). (Jan Gerber/News24) Since Sunday, the City Hall has been officially designated as the parliamentary precinct in accordance with Section 2 of the Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act. The OPA will retain the full ceremonial features of a SONA. Before the formal programme begins, the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) will conduct a display of military pageantry, which will include a performance by the military band, precision drills, and a display showcasing the skills and traditions of the armed forces of the Republic. The official proceedings begin when the president of the Republic arrives. At this moment, the military choir will perform the national anthem, timed to coincide with the 21-gun salute. Cape Town's winter weather permitting, there will also be a fly-over by the South African Air Force. "As it is the tradition, the proceedings will be characterised by ceremonial processions involving provincial Speakers, premiers, members of the judiciary, the deputy president, and culminating with the arrival of the president. These processions underscore the unity and cooperation between different levels and branches of government," said Didiza. An imbongi's performance will also precede Ramaphosa's address. "The imbongi's role extends far beyond mere performance; they are tasked with poetically reflecting on the socio-economic and political state of our nation, offering insightful commentary on the country's rich cultural tapestry," said Didiza. The imbongi will be Lutendo Evens Mugagadeli, widely known as Vendaboy Poet, and he will perform in Tshivenda. The language is chosen through a rotational process to ensure fair representation of South Africa's linguistic diversity. “ The theme for the 2024 Opening of Parliament Address (OPA) is: "My Parliament, My Voice, My Future." This theme resonates with the momentous 30-year milestone of our democracy during which the 7th Parliament is established.” - Speaker Didiza. #7thParliament. #2024OPA pic.twitter.com/UY5HJLbAdY — Parliament of RSA (@ParliamentofRSA) July 17, 2024 Didiza said that to her knowledge, by Wednesday afternoon, no party has indicated that they intend to boycott the proceedings. She said the rules are in place to deal with disruptions to proceedings. Furthermore, the Rules Committee is dealing with party's concerns about seating and about who the official opposition is. "So we do not anticipate any challenges." Safety measures are also in place. She added: We have taken all reasonable measures to ensure the event is safe. Secretary to Parliament, Xolile George, said the budget for the event is between R6 million and R14 million. "The reason we budget that range, its about looking at cost factors. In the last sitting in February we budgeted R8.4 million, as a budget. The actual expenditure may be less, it might be slightly more, depending on the reconciliation we will be doing," said George. NCOP chairperson Refilwe Mtsweni-Tsipane said that due to cost constraints, there would not be a gala dinner.