Cosatu has called on Parliament to show "some moral fortitude" in dealing with "delinquent" MPs. The MK Party nominated the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, John Hlophe, as a delegate to the JSC, the same body whose finding of gross misconduct led to his removal. There is also concern about ANC MP Zizi Kodwa returning to the National Assembly despite being on trial for corruption. ANC alliance partner, the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu), called on Parliament to show some "moral fortitude and leadership and crack the whip over the increasing numbers of delinquent" MPs. Among their concerns is the possibility that the National Assembly could elect disgraced former Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe, now the MK Party's parliamentary leader, as a delegate to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC). The JSC is the body that appoints judges and conducts disciplinary proceedings against judges. It was the JSC finding Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct for trying to influence Constitutional Court judges to rule in favour of corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma that led to him being the first judge in democratic South Africa to be removed. "Legislators have not even received their first salaries, yet already four MPs have found time and appetite to flirt with anarchy and juvenile antics," said Cosatu parliamentary coordinator Matthew Parks in a statement. He said: The Electoral Court has now found an Umkhonto we Sizwe Party (MKP) MP, Mr Visvin Reddy guilty of incitement to violence during the election campaign. A Democratic Alliance MP, Mr Renaldo Gouws, as well as another MK MP, Mr Andile Mngxitama, have been trending on social media with their rantings dripping with hate speech and calls for violence. "African National Congress MP, Zizi Kodwa, has been sworn in despite being on trial for charges of corruption. Parliament in a moment of ignominy now faces the prospect of impeached former Judge John Hlophe, now MK MP, being appointed to the Judicial Service Commission to appoint and oversee the judiciary!" Parks said South Africa had experienced the devastating consequences of Parliament turning a blind eye towards "rascals of dubious moral standing masquerading as public representatives and being allowed to run amok in the Legislature, government and society". "It has been ordinary workers, working class communities and society who have paid the price for this shameful collapse in ethics among some of those elected to lead." READ | ANALYSIS: Why the presence of Hlophe, Mkhwebane in Parliament makes case for electoral reform He said that over the years Parliament had been found desperately wanting and had turned a blind eye to MPs' indiscretions. "We expect the seventh Parliament to signal a firm break with this tradition of shame. It needs to amend its rules and actively sanction and expel those MPs who cannot be bothered to abide by its code of conduct, let alone the values of the Constitution. Clearly, political parties lack the moral compass to police themselves," he said. Parks added: A society that has buried thousands to political violence cannot afford to treat those who sow racism and hate speech with kid gloves. Nor can we afford to equivocate corruption and inexplainable lifestyles of public representatives. "The tasks of MPs are to pass laws and hold government accountable for their implementation. Society should not be expected to tolerate the morally deficient being entrusted with these sacrosanct responsibilities. South Africans have the right to expect and insist upon the highest ethical and moral standards among those elected and privileged to lead." On Tuesday, it emerged that MKP had nominated Hlophe to serve on the JSC. EFF leader Julius Malema, who was central to much of the controversy at the JSC during the previous parliamentary term, was also nominated by his party. However, ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli withdrew the motion for the election of JSC representatives. READ | Parliament warned against sending Hlophe to JSC, which found him guilty of gross misconduct Meanwhile, a group of civil society organisations have written to National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza, expressing their concern about Hlophe being nominated to the JSC. Freedom Under Law (FUL) - which played a key role in Hlophe's eventual impeachment - the Council for the Advancement of the South African Constitution (Casac), Judges Matter, the Helen Suzman Foundation (HSF), Defend our Democracy, and the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation wrote to Didiza, saying that designating someone to the JSC who was found guilty by that same body of gross misconduct would be completely inappropriate, irrational and susceptible to legal challenge. Zizi Kodwa and co-accused Jehan Mackay appear in the dock of the Palm Ridge Magistrate's Court. (Belinda Pheto/News24) News24 Last month, Kodwa "stepped aside" as sports, arts and culture minister after he was charged with corruption. Yet, he was sworn in as an ANC MP, coincidentally on the same day as Hlophe and other 57 MKP MPs. After roughly a week as an MP, Renaldo Gouws has been suspended by his party, the DA, while he faces disciplinary charges for racial slurs he made in a video clip that was deleted but archived in 2012. (Screenshot) The DA suspended Gouws days after he was sworn in over a video he posted online years ago in which he said: "Kill all the k****rs". Gouws, often at the centre of social media polemics, first claimed that the video was fake, but the DA established that it was the real deal. Mngxitama, the former EFF MP, BLF leader and alleged Gupta shill, often stirs controversy with his remarks. The Equality Court cleared him of hate speech after he said the following at a rally in 2018: "For each one person that is killed by the taxi industry we will kill five white people. For every one black person we will kill five white people. You kill one of us we will kill five of you! You kill one of us we will kill five of you! Kill one of us, kill five of you! You kill one of us, we'll kill five white people. We will kill the children! We will kill the women! We will kill anything that we find on our way!" There was an online petition calling for Mngxitama's removal from Parliament, as there was for Gouws. Andile Mngxitama before he was sworn in as an MK Party MP. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 The Electoral Court this week found Reddy guilty of contravening the Electoral Act with comments that conveyed serious threats of violence and intimidation, the latter which was "aimed at citizens not to vote" and that his threats of violence also interfered with the work of the commission, "especially [its] independence". Yet, he was only fined R150 000, which was suspended for five years. This sentence does not prohibit him from serving as an MP. MKP leader Visvin Reddy speaks outside the court. (Soyiso Maliti/News24) News24 Parliament's Ethics Committee and Powers and Privileges Committee made findings against several MPs in the past term, including former deputy ministers Pinky Kekana and Dipuo Peters, and former "Gupta Minister" Mosebenzi Zwane. Kekana has been reappointed as Deputy Minister of Public Service and Administration. There have also been several findings against EFF members, including an Ethics Committee finding that Malema should not have used the JSC as a " platform for his personal interests". Malema is challenging this finding in court.