Freedom Under Law will challenge the "wholly inappropriate, irrational" decision of the National Assembly to elect removed judge John Hlophe as a member of the JSC. Hlophe, who is the first judge in democratic South Africa to be removed, is now Jacob Zuma's MK Party's parliamentary leader. MK Party decried the DA's opposition to Hlophe's election as racist and railed against "unelected" NGOs. MK Party (MKP) parliamentary leader John Hlophe's designation to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC), the body that made a finding of gross misconduct that led to his removal from the Bench, will be challenged in court by Freedom Under Law (FUL) on the grounds of rationality and the rule of law. On Tuesday, the National Assembly elected its delegates to the JSC, with Hlophe, the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, among them. This move was opposed by the DA, FF Plus and ACDP and criticised by civil society. In response, the MK Party accused the DA of racism and railed against "unelected" civil society organisations, noting that countries like autocratic Russia had banned them. FUL played a key role in the protracted litigation, which eventually led to Hlophe's removal in February for seeking to influence two judges in a matter pertaining to MKP leader Jacob Zuma in 2008. Its executive officer, Judith February, said on Tuesday: "To have a situation where an individual who was found to have committed gross misconduct and was removed from judicial office, is now in a position to decide on the suitability of other candidates for judicial appointment is wholly inappropriate, irrational, and in our view, susceptible to legal challenge." She added: The designation of members of the National Assembly to the JSC is not equivalent to assigning members to portfolio committees within the National Assembly. "The Constitution requires organs of state to assist and protect the courts to ensure their independence, impartiality, dignity, accessibility, and effectiveness. "By designating an individual who has been found unfit to be a judge to the body responsible for the selection of judges, the National Assembly has fallen short of this duty. "FUL will be challenging Dr Hlophe's designation as a member of the JSC on rationality and rule of law grounds." Judges Matter similarly described the National Assembly's decision as "contrary to the spirit, purport and objects of the Constitution". "It is plainly irrational in relation to the injunction by Section 165[4] of the Constitution, which requires that Parliament takes measures to protect the independence and dignity of the courts," Judges Matter researcher Mbekezeli Benjamin said. "It is a cruel irony that aspirant judicial officers will be assessed on their ethics, integrity and fitness for judicial office by commissioners who themselves have been found guilty of misconduct. "Judges Matter reiterates our call for a written code of conduct for all commissioners, with a mechanism to recall those commissioners who do not uphold the terms of the code." READ | Hlophe seconds: MK Party parliamentary leader elected to Judicial Service Commission Section 89 of the Constitution, which deals with the removal of a president, states that a removed president "may not serve in any public office". But Section 77, which deals with the removal of judges, and Section 194, which deals with the removal of Chapter 9 heads, has no such provision. Furthermore, Section 47, which sets out the conditions for membership in the National Assembly, does not preclude removed judges or Chapter 9 heads. It is parliamentary precedent that parties do not object to their counterparts' nominees for delegations like that to the JSC. However, the DA, FF Plus and ACDP recorded their objections on Tuesday. Their - and BOSA and ActionSA's - arguments centred on the rationality of delegating someone who was found guilty of gross misconduct by the JSC to that same body. The counterargument, as offered by the MK Party, EFF and others, was Hlophe was deemed fit and proper to be an MP and therefore had all the rights of an MP, including serving on the JSC. They also mentioned Hlophe's judicial experience and extensive academic qualifications, including a doctorate from the UK's Cambridge University. Removed judge John Hlophe after he was sworn in as an MK Party MP. (Jan Gerber/News24) The ANC, which also voted for Hlophe's removal in February, said through its chief whip, Mdumiseni Ntuli, that it respected the DA's concerns and objections around Hlophe, but when the Constitution was silent on a matter, parliamentary principles must be adhered to. The upshot was that the first time a contentious decision was before the seventh Parliament, the parties belonging to the government of national unity (GNU) did not vote together. Said February: "It is also hard to reconcile the contradictory position of political parties which voted for Dr Hlophe to be removed from judicial office but now voted in favour of his appointment to the JSC. "This was an early test for all the parties forming the GNU to take a position which would ultimately strengthen the credibility of the JSC and the rule of law. All parties who did not object to the nomination [on Tuesday] are, by their silence, implicated in this egregious decision." READ | Parliament warned against sending Hlophe to JSC, which found him guilty of gross misconduct The other delegates from the National Assembly to the JSC are EFF leader Julius Malema, often at the centre of controversy at the JSC during the previous parliamentary term, the DA's Glynnis Breytenbach, the ANC's Molapi Soviet Lekganyane and Fasiha Hassan, and ActionSA's parliamentary leader, Athol Trollip. In a statement released after the parliamentary proceedings, Breytenbach, who has served on the JSC since 2014 when she became an MP, reiterated her party's objection to Hlophe joining the JSC. "The EFF and MK Party wish to tear down the independent judiciary, which the DA works to protect," she said. "It would be irrational for the National Assembly to have the same person impeached representing the National Assembly on the JSC. "This is a clear conflict of interest and an attempt to undermine the independence of the judiciary of South Africa. The National Assembly is bound to protect and assist the judiciary's independence, integrity, and dignity, which the DA does not take lightly. "Persons elected to represent the National Assembly on the JSC must hold such values, which cannot be said for Hlophe." She added: We risk undermining the JSC processes for the election of judges and their investigations into judges' conduct, endangering the rule of law in South Africa and the proper functioning of the judiciary. "The DA will continue to oppose the appointment of Hlophe and the attempts by the MK Party and EFF to undermine the judiciary." In response, the MK Party's secretary-general at the moment, Sifiso Maseko, expressed his party's "shock and utter dismay at the racist and unconstitutional conduct of the Democratic Alliance and a retinue of NGOs". "The racist DA objected to the appointment of MK Party MP Dr John Hlophe to serve on the Judicial Service Commission on the spurious grounds that 'the EFF and MK Party wish to tear down the independent judiciary, which the DA works to protect'." Maseko noted the Constitution was clear that except for the president, the removal of an officeholder through impeachment proceedings doesn't have any "collateral consequences". "It is a galling display of white supremacy for the DA which ceased being an opposition party after its capture of the ANC to now [seek] to dictate to the remaining African opposition parties what committees of Parliament they must be appointed to," read Maseko's statement. The JSC is not a "committee of Parliament". "It is pure hogwash for the DA to claim that 'it cannot stand that a person is allowed to serve on the same body that found him guilty of gross misconduct while he was a judge, resulting in his impeachment'. The constitutional principle of separation of powers stands firmly against such nonsensical assertion." Maseko then launched into a long tirade about "unregulated NGOs [that] are attempting to run the business of the National Assembly". "These white-led NGOs are completely unregulated, and their funding is likewise opaque. "They are corporate and foreign government instruments; many of these NGOs have been banned in other countries like Russia and India, which refuse to surrender their sovereignty to foreign governments and nefarious corporate actors." ANALYSIS | Why the presence of Hlophe, Mkhwebane in Parliament makes case for electoral reform Maseko also claimed Hlophe's "only sin was to be appointed in the corrupt Western Cape High Court and holding the historically corrupt white monopoly capital to account". In fact, what led to Hlophe's removal was his attempts to sway two Constitutional Court judges to rule in his now-party leader Zuma's favour in his long-running arms deal corruption case back in 2008. Zuma is now standing trial on those same corruption charges after over a decade and a half of legal manoeuvring and Stalingrad tactics to evade trial. The JSC's finding of gross misconduct against Hlophe in that matter, after a long court battle in which FUL was involved, led to Hlophe's removal. In December, the JSC - which excludes politicians - found Hlophe should face a second gross misconduct investigation over Western Cape Deputy Judge President Patricia Goliath's accusations he had used abusive language and assaulted a fellow judge. As the parliamentary impeachment proceedings was already under way, nothing came of this. The first judge to be removed, John Hlophe, and the first Chapter 9 head to be removed, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, are now both members of the House that removed them. Hlophe as the MK Party's parliamentary leader and Mkhwebane as EFF MP. (Jan Gerber/ News24) News24 Hlophe will join Breytenbach on the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development. Also serving on this committee is former Public Protector-turned-EFF MP Busisiwe Mkhwebane - also a known Zuma ally and the first Chapter 9 head to be removed. When Hlophe's impeachment was before the committee, she was the only member who strongly advocated that he should not be removed. The committee will be chaired by ANC MP Xola Nqola, who served on the Section 194 Committee that recommended Mkhwebane's removal to the National Assembly.