Gauteng premier Panyaza Lesufi has failed to announce his Cabinet yet again. Lesufi was meant to announce the Cabinet at 19:00 on Monday but instead, the Gauteng ANC held a press briefing announcing the postponement. This is because PGU talks have reached a deadlock, with the ANC accusing the DA of bullying and the DA saying ANC is trying to 'hog' all the positions. Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi has failed to announce his Cabinet for the second time. Lesufi was expected to announce his executive on Monday evening but instead, the ANC Gauteng called a media briefing to announce that the premier would no longer make the announcement. This is the second time that Lesufi has had a stop-and-start in announcing who will be on his executive council. Last month, his office sent out a media invite where he was expected to announce council members, but that was called off. ANC provincial secretary TK Nciza told journalists that Lesufi had called off the announcement because of a deadlock with the DA. A few minutes before the expected announcement, DA leader in Gauteng, Solly Msimanga, told News24 that the party would not be part of the announcement. Nciza alleged that the DA was negotiating in bad faith. He claimed the DA opposed the inclusion of other political parties in the provincial government of unity (PGU), which the two parties "fundamentally disagreed" on. READ | Two ANC ministers demoted as DA secures six ministers, six deputy ministers in new-look Cabinet Nciza, who was joined at the press briefing by Gauteng head of elections, Lebogang Maile, and deputy provincial secretary Tasneem Motara, said the DA wanted to bully the ANC into a coalition, and that would not happen. Nciza said: We don't believe we will be bullied by the DA here in Gauteng. The ANC and the DA, along with other smaller parties, are part of the PGU in Gauteng. Both parties supported each other in the election of the Speaker and deputy Speaker of the legislature. While things went smoothly in KwaZulu-Natal, where the ANC and the DA are already working together as part of the PGU, Gauteng is proving a lot more problematic. Even nationally, the two parties found each other after tense negotiations. On Sunday, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced a national executive comprised of 12 DA members, but the negotiations in Gauteng appear to be more complicated. Maile told the media that it was not the first time the DA and the ANC had reached a deadlock in their negotiations. He added that if it had not been for the disagreements between the two parties, Lesufi would have announced his Cabinet two weeks ago. Nciza claimed the main source of friction between the two parties was the DA's attempts to dictate which political parties should form part of the PGU. He added: The bone of contention is that there are parties the DA is pro, and parties the DA is anti. We are not forming a grand coalition with the DA. We are forming a government of provincial unity, and the DA cannot dictate which party we can or cannot work with. "We invited all political parties in the legislature. We agree with all the parties in the legislature except the DA." Maile and Nciza said Lesufi was ready to announce his Cabinet, but Luthuli House had instructed the provincial leadership to return to the negotiation table with the DA. Maile also disputed Msimanga's claims that the DA had boycotted the announcement of the Cabinet. He said the DA was not invited in any case because none of its members were going to be announced in Lesufi's Cabinet. "We were not going to announce the DA. We were going to announce an executive made of different political parties," he said. Maile believed the DA wanted to bully the ANC, and while the ANC was prepared to negotiate, it was not going to allow bullying. Maile said: We have concluded negotiations with all parties, but it's only the DA that is behaving like a spoilt brat. The Gauteng ANC leadership said Lesufi would announce his Cabinet on Tuesday "with or without the DA". However, speaking on Newzroom Afrika, shortly after the ANC briefing, Msimanga alleged that the ANC said it was "uncomfortable" with the inclusion of other parties in the negotiations. Msimanga said the DA had, however, told the ANC that a PGU could not exist without the inclusion of other political parties. Msimanga also revealed that the DA was unhappy about the positions the ANC offered. He said the DA was being offered two MEC positions and two portfolio chairperson positions. He, however, said this was not "the true reflection of what voters have said to us". He said: The party with 34% [of the votes] wants to hog on to eight positions and only give two to the DA and one to another party. We said we could engage and negotiate around this. "Today, we had our last meeting, and the last word that we got from the ANC was that they are going to consult their PEC and will come back to us by 16:00 but 17:30, we saw a media statement that said they were ready to make an announcement. "I talked to Panyaza Lesufi, called the provincial secretary, and said, 'Are you guys negotiating in good faith? You said you would come to us at 16:00 to look at the proposal and agree on the proposal, and if we agree on the proposals, we are more than happy to give you the names so that we have an inclusion' and that is not what they want," Msimanga told the broadcaster. READ | 'Postpone this thing': Gauteng DG's call led to abrupt halt of Cabinet announcement The Gauteng DA leader said it did not make sense that the two parties had managed to find each other in KwaZulu-Natal and nationally, but the same is not happening in Gauteng. "I will tell you what the issue is; the issue is that they want to hold on to all eight positions so that they can satisfy their own factional battles. So they are holding Gauteng and its residents ransom instead of saying, 'let us find a genuine government of provincial unity where all parties can be represented and can be represented equally,' and this is what we are asking for," Msimanga said. The parties are expected to continue their engagements on Tuesday.