DA federal chairperson Helen Zille says the ATM has failed to prove "sweeping allegations" of vote rigging, double voting, and fraud committed during the May elections. This comes after the ATM launched an application with the Electoral Court seeking a re-run of the general elections. The IEC's acting chief electoral officer, Masego Sheburi, denied the elections were not free and fair. DA federal chairperson Helen Zille has hit back at the African Transformation Movement's (ATM) vote-rigging court application to the Electoral Court, saying it is baseless, emotional, and "without a jot of evidence". In a scathing answering affidavit, Zille poked holes in the ATM's application seeking to set aside the 2024 May general elections, labelling the party's actions as an attempt to "undermine the integrity" of the Electoral Court. She said: The ATM has not put up evidence to prove its sweeping allegations of vote rigging, double voting, and fraud. It has not demonstrated that the elections were not free and fair. Moreover, its application is inexplicably late, and it makes out no case for condonation. For these reasons, the application should be dismissed. The papers come after the Electoral Court directed respondents to file answering affidavits by Wednesday. Zille said the court should slap the ATM with a costs order for its allegations premised on "unfounded allegations", accusing the party of abusing court processes and "wasting its judicial economy". READ | Electoral Court gives political parties until Wednesday to file papers in ATM vote rigging case She added the application was a waste of the respondents' resources. "The Democratic Alliance has incurred legal costs opposing the application. It would be unfair to leave the party out of pocket under these circumstances. "A costs order of an appropriate scale against the ATM, I respectfully say, is the most appropriate way of sending a message to the public that making unfounded allegations of fraud and vote rigging will not be countenanced." Zille said this was not the first time such a case had been brought to the court, referring to the MK Party's application. News24 previously reported the ATM was forging ahead with its court bid despite Jacob Zuma's MKP attempting to withdraw its court challenge to the hotly contested election result. The Sunday Times recently reported the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) had written to the court to ask it to set down the application for argument, alleging the notice of withdrawal was "irregular". The election results were declared by the IEC on 2 June. The ATM and MKP have yet to provide proof of their vote-rigging allegations. ATM leader Vuyo Zungula, in court papers, asked the Electoral Court to declare the elections were not free and fair "insofar as there was no democratic electoral process by the Electoral Commission of South Africa". The ATM wants the court to set aside the election results declared on 2 June and asked the court to declare Section 24A of the Electoral Court Act, 1998, unconstitutional. Zungula also wanted President Cyril Ramaphosa to declare fresh elections. READ | 'As big as an elephant': Without proof, Zuma repeats vote-rigging claims as MKP withdraws court bid Zille said this was the second case launched in the court challenging the validity of the elections where an applicant made sweeping allegations of "fraud and vote rigging without a jot of evidence". "Feelings are not evidence or proof of misconduct as the ATM seems to believe. The ATM effectively asks the court to rely on the say-so of the deponent to its founding affidavit, Mr Zungula. "The ATM levels allegations of serious misconduct against the commission and commissioners without evidence. "It then seeks to advance a bootstraps argument that the commission lacks impartiality because of its unsupported claims. This is impermissible." Much like the MKP's application, Zille said the ATM "appears to undermine the integrity of the electoral commission and to impugn the results of the 2024 elections". She added the DA opposed the application because the ATM did not provide evidence for the serious "allegations it made". Zille put it to the court: Ultimately, just like in the MK Party's case, it is an abuse of the court's process to make allegations of fraud and vote rigging against the commission [or any person, for that matter] without a proper basis. It is a waste of the court's judicial economy and the responding parties' resources. I respectfully submit that the court ought to grant costs against the MK Party of an appropriate scale. This is, in my respectful submission, necessary to send a strong message to the public that accusations of fraud and vote rigging must never be made lightly in this court and to protect the integrity of the commission and the electoral process. She also told the court the application was not "properly and adequately" served on the DA and failed to enjoin the Home Affairs minister in the case. Zille added the ATM made six claims that the elections were not free and fair, but "none of the claims are founded in evidence". The party also failed to prove the voters' role was inaccurate, as per its claim, she said. "The ATM has not adduced evidence to support its claim that the voters' roll is inconsistent and inaccurate. "The ATM has not adduced evidence to demonstrate that its claims of irregularity would impact on the election result, and the ATM has thus not proved that the elections were not free and fair," Zille added. READ | MK Party drops application to challenge election results, but that's not the end of the matter She said the ATM was not acting in the public interest and emphasised the application undermined court processes. In its papers, dated 11 July, the IEC's acting chief electoral officer, Masego Sheburi, said after reading the ATM's submissions, he believed the party had failed to present a credible case. "Accordingly, the application should be dismissed for non-compliance with the time limits prescribed in the Electoral Court Rules and as time-barred under rule 10," argued Sheburi. He said the case had no merit, adding: "No case is made out for the extraordinary relief the applicant seeks. "The ATM makes serious and sweeping allegations of electoral fraud, vote rigging, and political bias on the part of the commission. "It does so without particularising the allegations or furnishing evidence in respect thereof. This approach is extremely prejudicial to the commission, undermining as it does the integrity of the elections without good cause. It is deserving of censure in the form of an appropriate costs order." READ | IEC head Mamabolo says MK Party's vote-rigging claims are 'patently false' Like the DA's arguments, the IEC said the ATM was pursuing its own interests rather than those of the public in the case. Sheburi also denied the voters' roll contained inaccuracies, saying the IEC did not receive complaints the sealed ballot boxes were "abandoned", that the counting process was compromised, and that public confidence in the IEC was absent. Moreover, he added: I also strenuously deny the allegations in paragraph 78 of 'the defect or wrongful conduct' on the part of the commission and that the commission acts as 'an agent of one or some of the political parties in a manner that is a gross [...] neglect of its constitutional obligation'. Sheburi said there was no basis whatsoever for these extremely serious and prejudicial allegations. The IEC, he added, also vehemently denied it played any "political role" in its conduct of the electoral process. "I again deny the suggestion in paragraph 83 that the commission's independence and integrity have been tarnished in the eye of the electorate. Again, there is no evidence to support this contention… The commission denies all allegations of impropriety and misconduct levelled against it." READ | Gauteng police analyse footage of group that 'stormed' IEC warehouse Sheburi said the ATM failed to provide "credible and admissible proof of discrepancies and miscalculation of the results" or any failure by the IEC to discharge its constitutional obligation and administer free and fair elections. "In the absence of any evidence, the applicant's persistence in making these allegations is grossly irresponsible and ought to be sanctioned with a costs order." The IEC invited the ATM to withdraw its "unfounded" allegations against it. "The commission also denied that any case has been made out for a re-run of the 2024 NPE [national and provincial elections] or for any other relief the applicant seeks. The application should be dismissed with costs," Sheburi submitted.