President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address received varied responses, with former detractors - now allies in the GNU - praising him. Opposition leaders criticised the speech as lacking substance and filled with unfulfilled promises. Despite the criticism, some highlighted positive aspects of Ramaphosa's speech, focusing on the right priorities and the need for urgent action. President Cyril Ramaphosa's former detractors turned government of national unity (GNU) partners sang his praises while those who remain in the opposition benches labeled the speech as "appalling incessant lies". Ramaphosa delivered the Opening of Parliament Address at the Cape Town City Hall on Thursday. EFF leader Julius Malema said Ramaphosa's address "lacked substance". "It was just a man repeating what he said in February. The difference [between] now and February's [is that] the confidence and the energy are gone. It's a wounded buffalo that is trying to survive, and everything he says, he doesn't mean it." Malema said Ramaphosa has been discussing beneficiation since he took over the ANC in 2017 and the government in 2018. "We have not seen anything of that sort. You can talk about strengthening state-owned enterprises. They have collapsed under them. They create a crisis and then come back to us and say, 'We can fix it.' "He said nothing on international relations because he knows that it is a point of disagreement in this GNU and that once you go there, you are going to fight immediately, especially in relation to Palestine. They don't see eye to eye on those matters." Malema questioned the existence of the 2 million jobs that Ramaphosa said his government had created. "Where are those jobs? You cannot say EPWP are jobs. Those are positions for mobilisation towards the elections. After the elections, they give people letters terminating those contractual jobs," he said. He said the GNU was destined to fail. "It will not work; you can see the happiest people in that room are the white people, the DA, because it's the biggest beneficiary of this sellout coalition," added Malema. Rise Mzansi leader and Standing Committee on Public Accounts chairperson Songezo Zibi said that while Ramaphosa identified the right priorities, the government needed to act urgently. "I think the speech was workmanlike; the priorities that the president identified were the right priorities. What we need to see, though, is the urgency. "It is the change in pace, the change in thinking, particularly from ministers and government departments," Zibi said. He said specific, measurable objectives in each theme and in each government department were also crucial. "Because it is in that, that Parliament can then hold the executive [to] account and see whether the things that the president says the government is going to do will get done at the end of the day," Zibi said. READ | Ramaphosa confident GNU partners will find consensus on NHI UDM deputy president Nqabayomzi Kwankwa also gave an honest account of Ramaphosa's speech, describing it as a statement of intent. "The opening address was indeed an opening address, which was a statement of intent without the president giving us a progress report of what they had managed to achieve or have managed to achieve in the last five years and where the gaps are in terms of implementation and what needs to be done to improve the situation," Nkwankwa said. Kwankwa said Ramaphosa's speech sounded like he had not been state president for five years. "It was a statement of intent of what his government and the GNU intend to do without giving an account of what happened in the last five years," he said. Kwankwa added: If you were listening to that, you would think that President Ramaphosa was not South Africa's president in the last five years. It's like it's a completely new administration, and yet the only difference today is that it's a coalition, but he made some good points about re-industrialising the South African economy. He said Ramaphosa made good points towards dealing with the just energy transition and the process needed to follow and dealing with load shedding. ActionSA president Herman Mashaba said though he had approached the speech with positivity, he had been disappointed. Mashaba said Ramaphosa spent most of his speech trying to sell what he described as a GNU "pipe dream". "I think let's not sell pipe dreams to our nation. Let's sell them issues. Our people are facing porous borders where we're sitting with millions of people who are in our country taking economies, in the black communities, the poor black communities, and we need to deal with these issues," Mashaba said. He said Ramaphosa also failed to address other serious issues, including crime. "If you are not going to address them, you are not going to see any economy growing because it has never happened in the history of mankind where you can grow an economy, a sustainable one, in an environment of chaos, and this is something that's missing," Mashaba said. DA leader John Steenhuisen said they welcomed the "progressive" announcements Ramaphosa made during his Opening of Parliament Address. "The alignment with DA policy in the list of priority areas announced is a clear indication that our call for a programme based on rapid economic growth and job creation has been heeded. "The DA has advocated for some of these policies, and thanks to the votes of millions of South Africans who backed the DA's cause, these breakthroughs have landed on the agenda of the GNU," Steenhuisen said. When asked how the ANC reached consensus with its GNU partners during last weekend's crucial Cabinet lekgotla, ANC deputy secretary-general Nomvula Mokonyane said political parties signed the statement of intent, thus pledging their commitment. "That statement of intent has got a minimum programme. What he [Ramaphosa] was delivering is informed by the statement of intent that also looked at what came out of the different manifestos of the different political parties." Mokonyane said there was a difference between electioneering and implementing real policies. "We are now getting into the real business, and hence, there are no differences because there is a huge difference between being on the opposition side and having to govern. We are quite humbled that this GNU seems to be coming together. We need to nurture it and take it to the people of South Africa." Now that Rampahosa has set the agenda for the seventh administration, Mokonyane said South Africans can look forward to the national dialogue. She conceded that there were "some teething problems" in forming the GNU, but she said: "It's how you manage them, and I think we are managing everything well." Naturally, because the GNU was constituted of 11 political parties, there will be disagreements on various issues. She said: In the Northern Cape, some members of the GNU did not support the premier who was a candidate of the ANC, and we do not have ill feelings about that, just as it has happened in Gauteng. We need to make South Africans appreciate and understand that there will always be dynamics as and when this GNU evolves, and decisions have to be made. Asked whether there were concerns going into the 2026 local government elections, Mokonyane said the ANC was certain that South Africans would appreciate that "the ANC is not an organisation that is self-centered". "It's an organisation that is prepared to work with anyone who is prepared to travel this journey with us and therefore, the voter will have to give the ANC another chance. There is no other party in this country that can be the glue for political stability, progress, non-racialism, and non-sexism. It's only the ANC that can do that," said Mokonyane. She said credit must be given to the ANC. "It was not an easy journey, but it is a product that we must all guard jealously."