President Cyril Ramaphosa announced his executive on Sunday evening following the formation of a government of national unity (GNU) Opposition parties are sceptical about the GNU. Parties that are part of the GNU welcomed the announcement. Parties that form part of the government of national unity (GNU) have welcomed President Cyril Ramaphosa's appointment of his executive on Sunday evening, while the EFF said its decision not to join has been vindicated and vowed to "undermine the backward policy advancements of the ANC-DA grand coalition at all levels of government and on the picket lines". "Our collective responsibility as revolutionaries remains to fight for economic freedom in our lifetime, and report to the masses of our people that the former liberation movement has betrayed its historical mission, and morphed into a weapon of racism," reads the EFF's statement. "Let us build a strong, principled and revolutionary alternative towards true liberation. It's no retreat, no surrender as we confront racists and their lapdogs!" The EFF said it will "remain an effective opposition". "We call on all South Africans, the continent, and our allies in the globe to appreciate that South Africa has become a right-wing enclave in the continent that is unable to commit to meaningful change or challenge global capital, imperialism, and ethnic genocide, because they are in bed with the perpetrators of injustice." ♦?ICYMI♦? The EFF’s Statement on the Announcement of the ANC-DA Grand Coalition Cabinet by Cyril Ramaphosa - The announcement confirms that the ANC has abandoned its historical role as a liberation movement in Africa, and has solidified its role as an instrument of white… pic.twitter.com/MdYhIEzB8p — Economic Freedom Fighters (@EFFSouthAfrica) July 1, 2024 The EFF also called the DA racist and railed against the Oppenheimers and Ruperts. Another opposition party that did not form part of the GNU, ActionSA, also had concerns. Party leader Herman Mashaba, described the Cabinet as "bloated and compromised", but acknowledged that the announcement put to an end the uncertainty of the past few weeks. He had the following message for the new government: "You are now in government and you, and you alone, are accountable for the direction of our country. You can no longer rely on fear tactics of 'what-could-have-been-governments' anymore. Now is the time to reform our country and now is the time we are going to hold you to account for the change you bring." The ATM is also concerned about the newly appointed executive. "It is evident that the expansion of Cabinet is more about appeasing coalition partners than serving the best interests of the county," said ATM leader Vuyolwethu Zungula. Zungula was also concerned about the "misalignment of policies and the friction this will cause" between stakeholders. READ | Mashatile stays on as deputy president as DA, IFP and FF Plus bring new faces to the GNU fold BOSA spokesperson Roger Solomons said the party will use its representation in Parliament to ensure that the GNU acts in the interests of all South Africans and not in its own. "We appealed to Mr Ramaphosa to establish a national convention – comprising all 18 parliamentary parties – to decide on a new government that represents the interests of all 60 million South Africans. "That being said, the president and his party chose this course of action. We wish the new government well in their work." The ANC, in a statement, welcomed the Cabinet announcement. Quoting the Constitution, the ANC said the "formation of the government of national unity based on the statement of intent is a reflection that all of us must work together to 'heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights'". The statement reads: We call on all parties who signed up to the GNU to keep these wise words of the Constitution top of mind, and to put the people of our country first. "The ANC-led GNU Cabinet that will serve and lead the seventh democratic administration is an important step forward, and a testament to the resilience of our democracy. Now that Cabinet is formed, the finalisation of the structures of Parliament will take priority, to give expression to the national legislature's legislative and oversight mandate for the seventh term. The dynamic interplay between policy and oversight authorities will be a critical part of making the government of national unity effective in bringing about transformation, redress and national unity." READ | 'Time for confrontation is over': Steenhuisen calls on GNU to work together to fix SA's problems DA leader John Steenhuisen, who has been appointed as the agriculture minister, said in a statement: "The DA is proud to rise to the challenge, and take our place, for the very first time, at the seat of national government where we can introduce our track record of governance excellence, zero tolerance for corruption, and pragmatic policymaking based on outcome and not intent. The mission to create an open, opportunity society for all South Africans now becomes our sole focus as we work the levers of the highest level of government in our country." FF Plus leader Pieter Groenewald, who was appointed correctional services minister, said this "position serves as recognition of the key role that the party has played in South Africa over the course of the last three decades". "The party accepted the position in Cabinet to demonstrate its willingness to fulfil its role in the GNU to facilitate stability and progress in the country." Groenewald said: The party will always reserve its right to criticise and can assure the public that it will make full use of all governmental processes to serve the interests of voters. Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi said in a statement that the party looks forward to "playing an active role in elevating the status of Parliament and ensuring that the president, deputy president, ministers and deputy ministers act [to] uphold the Constitution, act with integrity, and spend the people's money correctly". "Our participation in the GNU does not mean we will rubber stamp all decisions of the executive. We will scrutinise all pronouncements and decisions of the executive, and where it is in the best interests of the people of South Africa, we will lend our support. Moreover, we will also push to ensure that there is proper parliamentary oversight over the Presidency; the mechanisms of which the rules committee has already begun exploring." GOOD secretary-general Brett Herron, whose leader Patricia de Lille returns as Tourism Minister, congratulated the new executive and said they must settle in quickly. READ MORE | School's out: Police and defence led by teachers in GNU Cabinet shake-up "Abnormal inequality and poverty have the country close to breaking point, and the new (expanded) government will be closely monitored and judged on its performance in bringing marginalised South Africans in from the cold. "The new GNU also has a critical job to re-assert non-racialism following an election in which many South Africans voted on identity lines. Failing in this regard will lead to unprecedented division on the road to the next general election in 2029. "The DA, in particular, has a role to play de-pressuring the GNU by unequivocally demonstrating that it is not the party of whiteness that many South Africans believe it to be."