The Electoral Court has set down the MK Party's latest court application, despite its withdrawal of the case. This, after the Electoral Commission of SA asked the court to proceed with the case, saying it is "imperative that the matter is ventilated publicly". The party alleges that there was vote-rigging in the May general elections. Although the MK Party withdrew the Electoral Court case in which it raises election vote-rigging allegations, the matter has been set down for hearing on 29 July after the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) asked the court to proceed with it. In a letter to the court, the IEC's attorney, Moeti Kanyane, said: "It is an absolute imperative that the matter is ventilated publicly and a final decision be made by the Electoral Court, at the least to confirm whether the allegations against the commission were made vexatiously and without just cause." The registrar of the court, Delisile Nhlapho, sent a notice of set down to the MK Party, IEC, the president and others on Monday to inform them that the case would be heard on Monday, 29 July. "If the application is not to be proceeded with, kindly notify this office," Nhlapho added. READ | MK Party drops application to challenge election results, but that's not the end of the matter The party dropped the case earlier this month after a weeks-long campaign to try to discredit the IEC and its performance in the May general elections. The withdrawal came just a few days after the party described its legal action as "necessary for the entrenchment into our constitutional system reverence for our constitutional right to choose leaders". In a similar but unrelated matter in early July, the MK Party launched an urgent application in the Constitutional Court to interdict Parliament from holding its inaugural sitting. The party also claimed in court documents that "hundreds of thousands of votes" had been stolen from it, but added that it would not provide its "large and growing body of evidence" of the allegations "at this stage".