The Electoral Court has issued a directive to 19 political parties to file answering affidavits by Wednesday. This after the African Transformation Movement launched an application with the court seeking a re-run of the general elections. In its court papers, the ATM claimed the elections were not free and fair. The Electoral Court in Bloemfontein has given political parties until Wednesday to file answering papers in the African Transformation Movement's (ATM) quest to declare the May general elections null and void. The directive, dated 8 July and seen by News24, stated the respondents were directed to file the answering affidavits by no later than 16:00 on Wednesday. The ATM is pushing ahead with its court bid despite Jacob Zuma's MK Party attempting to withdraw its court challenge to the hotly contested election result. The election results were declared by the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) on 2 June. The ATM and MK Party have yet to provide proof of their vote-rigging allegations. Its directive further said: "The applicant [the ATM] is directed to file the replying affidavit by no later than 16:00 on Friday, 12 July 2024. The court reserves the right to dispose of this matter on the papers without referral to [an] oral hearing. Further directives will be issued if necessary." The court cited 19 political parties - including the ANC, DA, EFF, IFP, FF Plus, UDM, African Independent Congress, COPE, GOOD, ACDP, PAC, Al Jama-ah, MK Party, ActionSA, Rise Mzansi, BOSA, United Africans for Transformation and the Patriotic Alliance - as respondents. READ | 'As big as an elephant': Without proof, Zuma repeats vote-rigging claims as MKP withdraws court bid The directive comes after the ATM filed papers seeking to have the results of the 2024 general elections set aside. The ATM and MK Party want the elections to be re-run because they believe there was vote-rigging. News24 recently reported that MK Party's lawyer, Barnabas Xulu, had written to the IEC's legal team to confirm the party's "temporary" withdrawal. Xulu wrote: "The withdrawal is in no way an admission that our client does not have a compelling case for the orders it seeks. The contrary is true." He said MK Party's "experts" were being engaged and would "continue to uncover further evidence of election irregularities". "The MK Party's experts require time to prepare comprehensive reports involving a thorough assessment of the IEC results," the letter stated. In a video the MK Party captured on Sunday, Zuma can be seen addressing a crowd of people and claiming: "The evidence we've received is as big as an elephant. It's a lot. Now, lawyers have to write all of that down. The case is coming. There is nowhere [across the country] where they didn't rob us." READ | MK Party drops application to challenge election results, but that's not the end of the matter The Sunday Times reported the IEC had written to the court to ask it to set down the MK Party's application for argument, alleging the party's notice of withdrawal was "irregular". In the IEC's responding affidavit, chief electoral officer Sy Mamabolo said the MK Party "misrepresented the actual election data and results and that its central allegation - that over 9.3 million votes are unaccounted for - is patently false". In court papers, ATM leader Vuyo Zungula added he believed his party could demonstrate the 2024 national and provincial elections were not free and fair, despite the IEC's declaration. Zungula said: The ATM has been the victim of miscalculations, voter rigging, and voter corruption. The party, which has yet to provide proof of its allegations, reminded the court it had the power to direct a re-run of the elections. Zungula said: "This court has power 'further' to ensure that the right to vote is exercised freely by all citizens and without prejudice. "Confidence to the commission has to be restored as a Chapter 9 institution. This will assist to strengthen democracy and the fundamental values of the Constitution, hence in the re-run, this court is asked to direct on how they should be condoned to avoid further damage to the credibility of the commission." He told News24 the ATM would file replying affidavits by Friday.