The National Assembly has determined that each of its 30 portfolio committees would have 11 members. Of the 11 members, four would be from the ANC, the DA and MK Party will get two seats each, while the EFF will get one, and other (smaller) parties will be allocated two seats. Several opposition parties have also called for the establishment of a committee to oversee the Presidency. The general elections may have reduced the ANC to a 40% party, but in Parliament it will still be able to wield power. The National Assembly Rules Committee deliberated on the number of members for all its portfolio committees. It has been proposed the ANC should occupy four seats in an 11-member committee. In such a committee, the DA and MK Party will get two seats each. The EFF will get one and other parties will be allocated two seats. In this option, the IFP does not qualify for an individual seat as it is considered as a component part of other parties. A second committee option makes provision for 13 members. The ANC would receive five seats, the DA will be allocated three seats, and the MK Party will have two of its members on such a committee. The EFF and IFP will get one seat each, and other smaller parties will get one seat between them. These figures were based on the proportional strength of parties. The committee has established 30 portfolio committees and five others, including standing committees. READ | Busy July ahead while Parliament waits on Cabinet announcement to appoint committees The portfolio committees are configured to shadow the Cabinet portfolios of the seventh administration. In the sixth administration, there were 27 portfolio committees. The increase to 30 follows the separation of agriculture from rural development and land reform, the separation of science and technology from higher education, correctional services from justice, and the establishment of the Department of Electricity and Energy. Electricity did not have a portfolio committee before, as the minister reported to the Presidency. Due to the increased number of committees, the number of members has been revised to 11 members per committee. Several MPs were also adamant Parliament should establish a committee overseeing the Presidency. The lack of a committee overseeing the Presidency has also long been an issue for opposition parties, and even before the release of the Zondo Report, a proposal from IFP chief whip Narend Singh to establish such a committee has been before the committee. Through the polls, the electorate instructed political parties to work together, and that is why we formed the GNU and went on further to establish Governments of Provincial Unity. The people’s voice matters.#LetsDoMoreTogether pic.twitter.com/ZkAnO9podH — ANC SECRETARY GENERAL | Fikile Mbalula (@MbalulaFikile) July 3, 2024 ACDP MP Steve Swart said the matter was raised in the previous Parliament. "There was a study done, and it was also a recommendation of the State Capture Commission. There are many, many commissions the Presidency also appoints, and they say they are not accountable to Parliament. So, I think this is something we really need to appreciate and consider. So, we would support that as well," he added. EFF MP Natasha Ntlangwini said the Presidency needed an oversight committee because its budget got bigger every year. Ntlangwini added: If we are not going to have effective oversight in terms of that portfolio, we may never know or trace all the entities that are reporting to him [President Cyril Ramaphosa] so he can just take all of the state-owned entities. Those budgets are going to him, and there is no effective oversight. "So, we need the director-general of the president to come and account. There must be some form of accountability on the Presidency," she said. FF Plus MP Corné Mulder added the issue had been discussed in Parliament since 1994. "It's nothing new. But as we move into a new dispensation, to a certain extent with where we are at the moment, I think it's important that we explore the principle and see if it's not possible. "I think we should look at the principle and see if it's not possible to make provision for that while we're moving forward now, I would support that," Mulder said. WATCH | New Cabinet ministers ready to 'serve the country' in government of national unity ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli did not have a problem with oversight over the Presidency. He, however, questioned why the president could not be held to account through existing committees. "I would have thought that the best way for us to take a decision of that nature would be that the members with experience briefly explain for us to understand what the limitations were of having the president's accounting [done] through the existing mechanism of the Department of Monitoring and Evaluation." Ntuli said: My own view is that, I know we may want to politicise this, which is not necessarily important. I think when we want to take a decision to create an additional portfolio committee, we have to really find a way to engage each other in a manner that clarifies our understanding about the limitations we want to overcome. The committee also appointed ANC MP Doris Dlakude as chairperson of the Subcommittee on the Review of the National Assembly Rules. The subcommittee was mandated to urgently convene to deliberate on the modalities of establishing an appropriate committee to oversee the Presidency, definitions of such titles as leader of opposition, chief whip of the opposition and chief whip of the majority party. The subcommittee will also review the modalities pertaining to questions to the executive. It is expected the committee will meet next Tuesday to iron out these issues. ALSO READ | ANC doubles down on Zizi Kodwa amid outrage over his return to Parliament Meanwhile, the EFF has also announced the deployments of its MPs. EFF leader Julius Malema remains the party leader while his deputy, Floyd Shivambu, remains party chief whip. Mandisa Makhesini has been appointed as the whip in the National Council of Provinces, responsible for overall functions.