The ANC has clarified the government of national unity (GNU) policy platform. The party says no agreement exists of sealed mandates where each minister in the GNU pursues their sectarian party policies. The clarification comes after the DA and ANC's inability to form a government in Gauteng, due to disagreements over the interpretation of the statement of intent. The ANC has moved to clarify the "false interpretation" of the government of national unity (GNU) policy platform, which has been at the heart of many disagreements during negotiations. In a statement on Thursday, its secretary-general, Fikile Mbalula, said the ANC had noted a growing narrative surrounding the GNU, which it leads. "This seems to be triggered by pronouncements made by individual political parties, within and outside the GNU, as well as an unfamiliarity with the agreed-to principles of the GNU. "The ANC wants to categorically state there is certainty about the policy platform of the ANC-led GNU. This was agreed to by all political parties who signed the GNU statement of intent [SOI]. "There is no agreement that exists of sealed mandates where each minister in the GNU pursues their sectarian party policies. "Such an agreement would run counter to both the letter and spirit of the Constitution, which all GNU party signatories have agreed to act on the basis of." READ | New Home Affairs Minister Leon Schreiber grants temporary visa extensions for foreign workers Mbalula said the ANC implored South Africans to familiarise themselves with the substantive elements of the GNU. What the ANC wants you to know about the SOI: 1. Clause 8 of the GNU SOI outlines the foundational principles of the GNU policy programme, anchoring it on transformative constitutionalism. 2. Clause 11 outlines the substantive policy programme that constitutes the basic policy framework of the GNU, building on Clause 8. 3. Clause 19 deals with instances where substantive disagreements over policy arise. Sub-clause 19.3 explains the majority that must be canvassed by a party wishing to repeal, change or introduce a policy. He added, taken into proper context, especially Clause 19.3, it must be understood all existing government policies remained in effect without exception. "Any other interpretation of this clause cannot be taken seriously at this point. It is our commitment as the ANC to participate in and sustain rational, honest and educational public discourse." The clarification comes on the back of a failed arrangement in Gauteng after talks between the DA and ANC collapsed at the eleventh hour. ANC STATEMENT ON CLARIFICATION OF ANC-LED GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL UNITY POLICY PLATFORM“The ANC wants to categorically state that there is certainty about the policy platform of the ANC-led GNU. This was agreed to by all political parties who signed the GNU Statement of Intent… pic.twitter.com/C7gIwyxQIB — African National Congress (@MYANC) July 4, 2024 On Wednesday night, Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi announced his provincial executive committee that excluded the DA but included Rise Mzansi, the PA, and IFP, which form part of the GNU. The road to the announcement has been rocky. The ANC's poor showing in the polls meant it had to enter into power-sharing deals in KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Cape, and Gauteng. In Gauteng, the ANC obtained 34% of the vote and the DA 28%. Lesufi postponed the announcement of his executive twice, after the DA and ANC failed to agree on the formation of the provincial government. The announcement was expected to take place on Monday. READ | Gauteng stalemate: Lesufi announces a minority govt with PA, IFP and Rise Mzansi after DA pulls out On Tuesday, DA leader Hellen Zille claimed the ANC had negotiated in "bad faith". She accused the party of failing to acknowledge the GNU's SOI, which was there to guide parties in forming a government. At the heart of the disagreements between the two parties, Zille said, was the ANC's failure to acknowledge two "crucial" clauses in the SOI. One is Clause 16, which deals with the principle of proportionality, inclusivity, and respecting the outcome of the election in forming a government. The other is Clause 19, which defines the principle of sufficient consensus in terms of which decisions will be taken in government. Zille was crucial in drafting the SOI, which it relied on in fighting for positions in President Cyril Ramaphosa's Cabinet. Nationally, 12 DA members, including party leader John Steenhuisen, are now a part of the executive. But in Gauteng, Zille said, the ANC wanted to offer the DA three out of 10 cabinet positions and refused to say how many seats it would be taking for itself or how many would be given to other parties. However, Lesufi added the deal fell apart after the DA reneged on an initial agreement it had entered into with the ANC.