The Johannesburg council rejected a R2.5-billion loan from the Agence Française de Développement. Finance MMC Dada Morero expressed disappointment with the EFF's decision to vote against the loan. Morero said the City would suffer financially because of the decision. Johannesburg Finance MMC Dada Morero said he was disappointed that coalition member, the EFF, voted against a R2.5-billion loan from the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) on Tuesday. The loan from the financial development fund was meant to cover capital expenditure projects and would be payable over 15 years. Johannesburg is led by a government of local unity (GLU), a coalition between the ANC, EFF, PA and minority parties. So far, the GLU has not been affected by the government of national unity (GNU), the coalition between the ANC and DA, which excludes the EFF. But it appeared on Tuesday that the EFF was no longer voting with its coalition. During the debate, the EFF said that the loan would hit the poor the hardest because the "interest was too much". READ | Johannesburg council rejects R2.5bn loan amid political standoff The party said it would rather have an increase in revenue collection to cover the shortfall than a loan that would need to be paid back in quarterly instalments. The DA said its rejection of the loan had not changed in the three times that the same loan was put forward to the council and rejected. It said the party had asked for the council to be furnished with the relevant documentation detailing which capex projects the loan was for, and for the documents detailing the City's ability to pay back the loan, but "we are still none the wiser". The party added: We don't know if the City can afford it. There is absolutely no information available for us to make an informed decision. The speaker for the PA was not in council to deliver the party's stance on the loan. The GOOD party said it needed more information on what the capex projects were if it was going to vote for a 15-year burden. "Without a plan there's no way to measure the potential benefits. It was tabled with no reports … the lack of financial transparency leaves the council without an understanding of the financial health of the City," it said. ActionSA asked if the council was willing to indebt the residents for 15 years, especially after the massive tariff hikes the City had put in place. "Maybe we can think about it if the City can prove it can pay the loan. So far, we are not convinced," the party said. It suggested going after the big companies that owe the City millions in unpaid revenue. "Go get the money from them and then bring this [the loan] back [to council]. Then maybe - just maybe, we will support it," ActionSA said. The ANC said it "sees nothing wrong with the loan", and it is "difficult" that members would come to council complaining that the AFD interest was too high "but they are not saying which institution is willing to give us a lower rate". "Our people are waiting for capital projects to be completed, but instead, we are [debating the loan]. Our plea is to prioritise residents in Johannesburg," the ANC said. As finance MMC, Morero had the final say, he said the City relied on three avenues for the budget and that the R80.9 billion for 2023/24 was approved for funding from: the City's own cash - those are the coffers and revenue; grants and loans from the Treasury; and borrowings from institutions like the AFD. "So, it is part of the budget, and we need to raise it. It's important that the loan is taken because, without it, the City is financially compromised," Morero said. He said the revenue collection rate was 90% in June, but wasn't always stable because of the "economic conditions we find ourselves in". The 90% revenue collection brought in the R4.5 billion a month the City needed to survive, but the normal collection rate was bringing in between R3.9 billion and R4.2 billion, "which is financially straining" the City. READ | Johannesburg council to reconsider R200 prepaid electricity surcharge amid public outcry According to Morero, the 2023/24 budget was 78% spent, and 13% of the unspent budget was meant to come from loans. After the debate, ActionSA called for an hour caucus break. This was the fourth break on Tuesday. The day began with a 30-minute caucus break from the ANC, then the PA asked for an hour break, and an hour caucus break from the EFF followed that. According to party members in the gallery, the caucus breaks allowed latecomers from the GLU to beef up their numbers. When the meeting started at 10:00, there were only 154 of the 270 councillors present. For the loan motion to pass, it needed a majority. Speaker Margaret Arnolds granted a number of breaks during proceedings. (Papi Morake/Gallo Images) Gallo Images In Johannesburg, that number is 136 councillors. As the day wore on, councillors trickled in until the GLU side of the council was almost complete. After the debate, Speaker Margaret Arnolds granted ActionSA's break, but only for 40 minutes, after the IFP said it was important they break before the vote in case they changed their minds. But the party had not changed its mind. The final count was 118 councillors, including the EFF, against the loan and 111 for the loan. Before leaving the council, Arnolds told councillors that lunch would no longer be served during council meetings. The Johannesburg council is one of the most expensive to hold, costing around R600 000 per sitting, per day. Most of this goes to protection and catering. It is not known if catering would have continued if the loan had passed. Meanwhile, after council, Morero said he was disappointed that the EFF voted against the loan, especially since it had voted for the budget which included that loan. He said: We are very disappointed, especially as they are our partners in government. It makes our cash position difficult. He said working with the EFF was not up to the local government, but the decision came from their national leaders. "We are disappointed with their conduct today. But working with them is not our decision to make," Morero said. He added that the loan agreement would return to council until it was passed.