Former opposition parties, now part of the GNU, said Parliament's oversight must improve. The so-called Progressive Caucus offered more racial invective and populism, including a law against "foreign agents". MPs offered suggestions to improve parliamentary oversight work, like the way questions are asked in committee meetings, and Speaker Thoko Didiza said they were looking into obtaining a "dome" for sittings. Judging by the debate on Monday, there remain questions over Parliament's effectiveness, given one side of the House forms part of the GNU and the other committed to conspiratorial narratives. Former opposition parties now belonging to the government of national unity (GNU) view their new influence as an opportunity to reset Parliament's functioning in fulfilling its constitutional mandate to oversee the executive. Parties remaining outside the GNU, however, already called into question its partners' commitment to oversight, especially that of the DA. The so-called Progressive Caucus - the MK Party, EFF, ATM, NCC and UAT - offered racial invective and populism when the National Assembly debated Parliament's budget on Monday, like it did during the debate on the Opening of Parliament Address. The ATM also proposed a law against "foreign agents" - a move from Russian President Vladimir Putin's authoritarian playbook. There were also general administrative concerns - Parliament's inadequate budget and how it impacts the legislature's functioning, the lack of a permanent building since the January 2022 fire, and the rushed process to deal with the budgets - and practical suggestions to improve Parliament's oversight function. DA chief whip George Michalakis said it was now more important than ever to ensure the policy objectives and targets set by every department and as set out during the president's speech, were placed on portfolio committees' agendas and monitored closely. "When it comes to oversight, it is first Parliament's duty to monitor closely the implementation and realisation of these objectives, but also to ensure that we do from our side what we can to assist in making it a reality," he added. His deputy, Baxolile Nodada, said the previous Parliament appeared to have more breakers than builders. "We saw this in the willful dereliction of duties or rubber-stamping of harmful legislation. "We saw this when committees undertook public participation at an average cost of R300 000 per public hearing per district - a whopping R900 000 per province - but refused to listen to the input of the people. We saw this when committees flaunted procedure in order to push through legislation." Nodada added: But we have an opportunity now. A rare chance to turn the Titanic around before we hit the iceberg. It will be hard work. It will take unprecedented cooperation and trust. But we can make this work. Another GNU party chief whip, the FF Plus's Wouter Wessels, said Parliament should not be reduced to a rubber stamp and it was an impediment to democracy that the executive introduced the majority of legislation. Rise Mzansi MP Makashule Gana said the seventh Parliament should not be an extension of the executive and just rubber-stamp executive decisions. He added Rise Mzansi would not use its positions to protect the executive. Gana recalled the criticism Parliament endured from the Nkandla judgment and Zondo Commission. "We can't afford to repeat the same mistakes," he said. READ | OPA debate: GNU parties warn against populism, attacks on the Constitution ANC deputy chief whip Doris Dlakude - who also occupied this position in the previous two Parliaments - said the Zondo Commission made various findings on Parliament and the sixth Parliament had a "comprehensive response". "The seventh Parliament should continue the work of the previous democratic Parliaments," she added. ANC MP Cameron Dugmore said: "When it comes to this House, we, as ANC members and comrades deployed in this House, are committed to playing our role with regard to oversight without fear or favour." BOSA deputy leader Nobuntu Hlazo-Webster added that Parliament should serve the 61 million South Africans by having politicians who stood on principle, "not swayed by the promise of power or proximity to wealth". "Recent responses to the president's failed promises show that what was an opposition has become a product of transactions for power, relevance and proximity to wealth. "Just the other day, the same DA was campaigning for a trimmed Cabinet of 15 ministries, few deputy ministers, and a 'cut Cabinet perks' bill. One sniff at perks and Cabinet positions and it's vanished from their agenda." READ | OPA debate: SA will continue with 'principled' foreign policy, says Ramaphosa ActionSA chief whip Lerato Ngobeni said party believed this seventh Parliament "must be a vigorous centre of critical engagement upholding transparency and accountability, areas where previous Parliaments have often fallen short". She added the need for robust oversight was pressing to avoid past failures, like state capture. ACDP MP Steve Swart agreed oversight and accountability must improve. He said while they were not part of the GNU, they aligned themselves "with those who want to build" and wished the GNU the best, because its success would be the country's success. The so-called Progressive Caucus did not share this view. MK Party MP Wesley Douglas, who served with Swart as an ACDP MP between 2007 and 2009, referred to his party leader, corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma, as the "rightful president" of South Africa. He said the MK Party was going to reclaim the land and the "appropriations budget" would be used to maintain the status quo. "We will not let the white people take that land and use it to make boats and to make cars and have nice suits like they're sitting here in the DA. Nice German cars, nice suits," Douglas added. Wessels said his racial polarisation undermined the House's oversight function, while Dugmore reminded him the previous administration passed the Expropriation Bill, which the Zuma administrations failed to do. EFF MP Omphile Maotwe said: "It is a fact that this GNU … was formed by the white capitalist establishment, hoped to bring everybody into a signed alliance with the national executive, thus extinguishing the opposition. "It seeks to mask the contradictions of race and gender that the ruling elite has failed to resolve since the dawn of our democratic society. It seeks to silence the voices of the oppressed for the urgent need for land and economic freedom in our lifetime." Maotwe added the "tyranny of the majority" suppressed Ramaphosa's impeachment over Phala Phala. Today, this tyranny is continuing the form of the GNU. Nodada said he agreed with Maotwe about the importance of accountability, and that was why the DA wrote to the Portfolio Committee on Police the police should come and explain why there had been no movement in their investigation into EFF leader Julius Malema and his deputy, Floyd Shivambu. Maotwe also renewed the EFF's call that Parliament should be moved to Tshwane, to which Dugmore said it provided many jobs in Cape Town. "How many jobs will be lost here? We'll tell the people that the EFF wants to move Parliament." ATM leader Vuyolwethu Zungula said: "The portrayal of the progressive opposition parties as disruptors is fuelled by anti-constitutional propaganda aimed at undermining the essential role of opposition in a constitutional democracy. "Mainstream media has also contributed to perpetuating this narrative. Anyone who wants to build this country should welcome the opposition, particularly because they know the importance of having an opposition in terms of ensuring that there is going to be accountability." He added the ATM would, during this term, introduce bills to address the country's pressing issues. "The first is going to be a foreign agents bill, that will be sponsored to designate all foreign-funded NGOs and entities as foreign agents. These NGOs and entities are actively in the political terrain on behalf of their foreign funders, who wants to advance foreign interest in our country," said Zungula. Foreign NGO Human Rights Watch described similar legislation in Russia as an "attack on free expression and legitimate civic activism". NCC leader Fadiel Adams said: "In this budget, you have planted the seed of the second revolution. Because in this budget, you have ensured the oppression of our people for another five years. I can guarantee you, Speaker, that the hungry, the oppressed, the homeless, the illiterate, the waterless, are coming. "I want to caution you, Speaker, when I say to you, that the battle lines in this Parliament have been drawn, between those of us that embrace and cherish the values of the Freedom Charter and those of you who trample on it, with your newfound comrades." UAT leader Wonderboy Mahlatsi said Parliament should "be a true mouthpiece of the people it should echo the voices of the dispossessed, the landless and the marginalised". "With the GNU and the composition of white power, we must raise our black consciousness above our class consciousness," he added. READ | ANC not keen on MK Party, EFF tilt to amend Constitution for land expropriation without compensation There were also constructive suggestions. Typically, in committee meetings, MPs ask all their questions at once. It regularly happened that chairpersons would allow MPs, often from the ANC, to go off on long tangents. When officials then had to answer, they were pressed for time, dodged questions or answered superficially. Michalakis and veteran legislator Swart suggested they follow the style of questioning often employed in the Standing Committee on Public Accounts and last year during the inquiry into Thabo Bester's escape, where MPs are allotted a set amount of time and their questions are answered immediately, allowing follow-up questions, like a lawyer would question a witness during court proceedings. "The pursuit of effective oversight must be tireless and rigorous, constructive and evidence-based. And it needs us to ask tough questions, but it must allow us to ask follow-up questions. You need to be able to cross-examine and get to the heart of a matter," said Swart. Noting how pressed for time they were in processing departmental budgets, UDM MP Nqabayomzi Kwankwa and Swart suggested the statutory deadline - the end of July - for the passing of these budgets are relooked in an election year. Kwankwa also suggested Parliament should institute a "motion of censure" for ministers who dodged question sessions. Hlazo-Webster said a committee to oversee the Presidency should be instituted. This has long been a bugbear of the opposition and should be revived in the Rules Committee after ANC MPs kicked the can down the road last year. National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza conceded there were "some glitches" in processing the budget and legislation to extend the timeline during election periods should be considered. Didiza said the sixth administration started engaging National Treasury on Parliament's funding model. "Careful consideration of our budget will show that it has been declining over time, which has had a negative impact on the work of Parliament. The burning of Parliament has added more strain and has affected its effectiveness." She added she met with Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Dean Macpherson "to explore the possibility of getting a dome that has been used by the state for big events previously, like the funeral of late President Mandela". They will meet again this week. "Should we become successful, this step, while it is temporary will go a long way in ensuring that Parliament undertakes its business effectively." Monday's sittings took place in a marque tent on the parking lot at the corner of Roeland and Plein streets, opposite Parliament. Several MPs remarked this was a low point, but Deputy Speaker Annelie Lotriet said it showed Parliament's commitment "to serve the people of South Africa no matter what". Wessels added given how some MPs behaved in the sixth Parliament, the setting was profound. "Because a circus is in a tent," he said. "Let us during this term avoid being a circus but set an example."