South African foundations founded on the "legacies of eminent freedom fighters" have called on South Africans to participate in a national dialogue. The Robert Sobukwe, Chief Albert Luthuli, Oliver and Adelaide Tambo, Ahmed Kathrada, Jakes Gerwel, Umlambo and Thabo Mbeki foundations made the call in Johannesburg on Thursday. The foundations said the purpose of the national dialogue was to craft a shared vision and chart a way forward. South African foundations founded on the "legacies of eminent freedom fighters" have called South Africans to participate in a national dialogue. "The foundations, as leading social institutions, believe that an urgent, inclusive citizen-led national intervention is required to restore the legitimacy, credibility, and enhancement of the South African democratic project," said the Steve Biko Foundation's Nkosinathi Biko. Biko made the call on behalf of the Ahmed Kathrada, Chief Albert Luthuli, Desmond and Leah Tutu Legacy, Oliver and Adelaide Tambo, Jakes Gerwel, Umlambo and the Thabo Mbeki foundations, as well as the Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe Trust, who say a conversation is needed to reflect on the country's last 30 years and to pave a way forward. READ | 'It has become all too easy to point fingers': Ramaphosa supports Mbeki's national dialogue proposal Speaking to the media at the Mandela Sanctuary in Johannesburg on Thursday, the Thabo Mbeki Foundations' Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi said South Africans have never been despondent in times of crises. Fraser-Moleketi said: South Africa is in a political crisis at this moment. For the first time in 30 years, the electorate has decided not to give any political party a majority vote. This presents an opportunity for citizens, communities and everyone to review the past years and to focus on what has gone wrong and how that can be addressed. She said the results produced by the 2024 national and provincial elections call upon all South Africans to reflect on the country they want. "We started with great enthusiasm and made gains, but we have also lost some of those gains in recent years. We have seen the increase in crime, gender-based violence, and youth unemployment, at this point, is at its highest level," she added. READ | COALITION NATION | Rise Mzansi the latest party to sign GNU statement of intent Political apathy, she said, has not only been demonstrated by the proliferation of political parties that participated in last month's election. "In the past 15 years, we have seen the collapse and paralysis of state-owned companies, and this has resulted in the stagnation of the economy and low economic growth. And his review, at Freedom Park, of the 30 years of democracy, president Thabo Mbeki pointed to a number of issues that have led to the collapse of governance and the undermining of the democratic state." She said Mbeki presented to his foundation the need to engage in a new inclusive national dialogue and "the need to come together in a convention for a democratic renewal (CODA". Mbeki called on existing civil society to lead the process of rejuvenating the political, economic and social fabric of South Africa's society. READ | COALITION NATION: Ramaphosa's scathing 'Dear John' letter to Steenhuisen The process is aimed at engaging communities at local, regional, provincial and national levels, she explained. "Our aim is not to be the leaders of this process but to initiate and guide it, and in order for the process to be credible, there is a need to identify prominent and credible leaders in communities that have the track record in steering the ship." A structure would need to be established that will manage the process in a way that ordinary voices are heard and recorded. "The end results of this process should be to address political issues, which include upholding our Constitution, and economic issues, and we don't want the scourge of hunger to continue as we see children dying of malnutrition in parts of our country. We need to deal with the issue of social cohesion and get it right this time." In his inauguration speech after being sworn in at the Union Buildings last Wednesday, Ramaphosa asked South Africans to join in on the dialogue. He said: We will invite all parties, civil society, labour, business, and other formations to a national dialogue on the critical challenges facing the nation. We will seek, as we have done at so many important moments in our history, to forge a social compact to realise the aspirations of our National Development Plan. Ramaphosa implored individuals, families and communities to "draw on our every strength to turn our dream for a better South Africa into reality". The calls for a national dialogue were first proposed by former president Mbeki before the May general elections. READ | How the ANC wooed its former leaders to join elections campaign News24 reported last month that in its hour of need, the ANC dusted off Mbeki to campaign for the party. Insiders at the time said Mbeki agreed to join the campaign only after he'd presented party bosses with a list of conditions to attend to after the elections. One of the conditions was a national dialogue after the elections. However, the elections head, Mdumiseni Ntuli, denied this. Reading a statement on behalf of the foundations, Biko said the country has found itself on a "dangerously uncertain path". "A directionless corruption of our body politic that has led to the current state of paralysis in social, economic, political, and governance spheres and national despair." Biko said the purpose of the national dialogue is to develop a shared vision. "The current parlous state of economic growth, coupled with widespread crime and corruption, poverty, gross inequality and intractable unemployment have earned our nation a dishonourable place on many global indices." READ | Mothunye Mothiba: A government of national unity and the way forward for SA Biko said such a ticking time bomb must be disarmed through a more responsive democracy. "South Africa, we are concerned about the perilous state that the country finds itself. In spite of a proliferation of political parties and independent candidates in the recent 2024 elections, fewer voters participated than ever before. The results of these elections point to an increasing fragmentation in our society. This is an ominous sign that the faith of citizens in electoral democracy has declined since its birth in 1994," he said. Biko stressed that the foundations do not have a "predetermined" outcome but expect that citizens will "organically produce" a national compact. This is how the foundations plan to execute the national dialogue: A secretariat shall be set up to develop the national dialogue programme. Elaborate engagements with different groups and communities across the nation will take place. Priority areas and workstreams for dialogue topics and programmes of engagement will be identified. Flowing from the dialogue, a national compact will be compiled, considered and adopted. The national compact will become the operational programme of all sectors of South African society, including government, Parliament, civil society and business. In a supporting statement, the Robert Sobukwe Foundation's Advocate Richard Sizani said Sobukwe, who would have turned 100 this year, would be beaming at the initiative. Sizani slammed the newly formed MK Party for calling for South Africans to take up arms before the elections. "You can see out there that there are irresponsible leaders who are already telling people that the great questions of the day can be answered by the barrel of the gun, and this is not something we should encourage. "I get very worried when I see young chaps wearing camouflage that are fake, pointing a finger as if they have carried a gun, and I am sure they have never carried even one gun during their lifetime." READ | Nontobeko Gcabashe: Social cohesion is possible through grassroots women leaders He said the question of ethnicity also needed to be addressed in South Africa. "It is becoming a challenge, we shouldn't run away from it. If a minister is from a particular region, that department's whole top management structure will come from that region, and you have seen in the elections people calling for independent KwaZulu-Natal and Western Cape. We need to address that." He also slammed the Patriotic Alliance's Gayton McKenzie, saying, "some leaders who might now be in Cabinet, who are saying, mabahambe (let them go)" without checking whether some people were in South Africa legally. The Oliver and Adelaide Tambo Foundation's Natasha Allie admitted that this was the beginning of a long and arduous journey. "This is not an instructive process, it is not the foundations telling the nation or the government what to do. We want collaboration to be sown and have the people tell us how they want this nation to be governed," said Allie.