The ANCYL in Free State wants one of its comrades to be included in the provincial executive. Premier MaQueen Mathae announced her provincial executive in June. The ANCYL in the province has demanded the removal of the MEC of Health to make space for a Youth League member serving in the legislature. The ANC Youth League in Free State has called the exclusion of young people in the provincial executive "nonsensical" and has demanded Premier MaQueen Mathae to make space for one of their own in her cabinet. The call by the ANCYL in Free State follows a similar dissatisfaction by their counterparts in Gauteng, who have also raised their displeasure that Premier Panyaza Lesufi has excluded young people from his cabinet. In a statement on Saturday, following its provincial executive committee meeting on Friday, the ANCYL in Free State said its call for the inclusion of young people in the executive continues to "fall on deaf ears". The league has demanded that Mathae remove Cosatu provincial secretary, Monyatso Mahlatsi, from her executive and replace her with a Youth League member serving in the legislature, Zama Sigwebela, whom they said is "more experienced". The Youth League said: We must raise the question as to how it is that Cde Zama Sigwebela, being the only young member of the Free State Legislature from the ranks of the YL, has been overlooked despite being far more experienced than some of the first-time members of the institution? This is quite astonishing and nonsensical. "Despite the premier having reduced the amount of MECs from 10 to nine, we believe that a consideration of Cde Zama for the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development or the Department of Sports, Arts, and Culture should have been made in the interest of including young people as part of the generational mix," said the Free State ANCYL. Mathae, who replaced Mxolisi Dukwana as premier, announced her provincial cabinet in June. Dukwana is now the Speaker in the Free State Legislature. He replaced Ntombizanele Sifuba, who was re-elected as Speaker but later announced as the MEC of Sports, Arts, and Culture. But now, the ANCYL wants Mahlatsi removed to make space for Sigwebela. In their statement, they said they were "aggrieved" by Mahlatsi's inclusion in the executive and alleged that Cosatu contributed to the ANC's loss of votes in the province. "We all know that Cosatu was nowhere to be found during the elections but instead was part of the reason we lost some votes by causing instability and promoting anarchy in some ANC led municipalities during the elections through marches that compromised the delivery of services," said the ANCYL. They added: It is for these reasons we are of the view that Cde Mahlatsi's appointment as an MEC should be withdrawn and that he be replaced by Cde Zama Sigwebela. While the ANC managed to retain power in the Free State, it suffered a decline from 61% in 2019 to 51.87% in the recent general election. In its statement, the Youth League in the province also blamed the provincial elections team for this decline. It alleged that provincial elections teams (PET) downplayed the emergence of Jacob Zuma's MK Party and Ace Magashule's ACT in the province. MK Party got 1.93% of the votes in Free State while ACT managed to score 1.83% In its statement, the ANCYL in the province said: "Despite a number of warnings from the volunteers on the ground about some of these parties making inroads into ANC strongholds, the response from the PET leadership would be to rubbish those warnings without substantive facts or due consideration," reads the statement. READ | Panyaza Lesufi keeps door open for DA, but ANCYL cautions against 'silent coup' The provincial Youth League accused its mother body of failing to support its structures going into the elections. It claimed "there was literally nothing done" to motivate volunteers and leagues during the election campaign. "We remain deeply concerned by how compromised the election machinery has been, especially as we move towards 2026 local government wherein the ANC in Free State is sitting with a coalition agreement in five municipalities located in major towns within the province. "We urge the leadership to desist from this ivory tower approach to elections and start serving structures in order to win back lost ground," said the Free State ANCYL's statement.