President Cyril Ramaphosa delivered his Opening of Parliament Address at the Cape Town City Hall on Thursday night. Ramaphosa said the government had committed to bringing stability to governance in metros and restoring delivery services. He added that the government had a constitutional obligation to assist municipalities to effectively exercise their powers and functions. With the 2026 local government elections looming, President Cyril Ramaphosa says the government of national unity (GNU) will prioritise the 257 municipalities in the country. Delivering his Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday night, Ramaphosa said the seventh administration would pay special attention to struggling municipalities. Ramaphosa said: "To achieve rapid, inclusive growth, we need to fix our struggling municipalities." The president outlined key priorities after a crucial Cabinet lekgotla meeting this past weekend. He said GNU partners agreed that municipalities must become both the providers of social services and facilitators of inclusive economic growth. During the sixth administration, municipalities around South Africa were plagued by service delivery protests, with some described as dysfunctional. The eThekwini metro, which recently appointed Cyril Xaba as mayor after Mxolisi Kaunda was shown the door for governance failures, has been on Ramaphosa's radar. READ | Ramaphosa confident GNU partners will find consensus on NHI Under Kaunda, the once world-class city was brought to its knees, and the tourism and hospitality sector was at its worst. In the previous administration, Ramaphosa used the District Development Model policy to streamline service delivery in the three spheres of government. During the president's imbizos, communities often complained about poor service delivery facing their municipalities. Ramaphosa told MPs on Thursday that the government must work to attract investment. "This approach can encourage businesses to expand and create more jobs in municipal areas. Investors are attracted to areas with reliable and modern infrastructure," he said. Ramaphosa said simplifying and speeding up planning and regulatory processes can make it easier for businesses to invest and operate in a municipality, thus creating more jobs. "As the national government, we have both a constitutional responsibility and a clear electoral mandate to assist municipalities in the effective exercise of their powers and functions," he said. "We will ensure that the institutional structure and funding model for local government is fit-for-purpose and that municipalities are financially and operationally sustainable." The president said the government would put systems in place to ensure that capable and qualified people were appointed to senior positions in municipalities, and to facilitate independent regulation and oversight of the appointment process. To address challenges in metros, Ramaphosa said: As an immediate priority, we will bring stability to governance in our metros and restore the delivery of services. We have already begun this work. Ramaphosa said he visited eThekwini metro earlier this year, where he met with residents, local business leaders and municipal officials. The president said he was told that people wanted to work together to restore their city to its former glory. "We have since put in place the eThekwini Presidential Working Group to enhance support from both national and provincial government to turn the metro administration around, to fix the problems in water and sanitation, and to attract new investment," he added. READ | Ramaphosa commits to universal early childhood development and educational support "This approach will be extended to other metropolitan cities that face serious challenges so that our cities can be engines of growth and dynamic centres of opportunity," said Ramaphosa. "In the next five years, working together, drawing on our collective capabilities, we will forge a new inclusive growth path for South Africa by pursuing a massive investment in infrastructure," he said. Last weekend, the newly appointed minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Velenkosini Hlabisa, told the media that he would be dissolving poor-performing municipalities. "When a municipality has been assisted, but there is a reluctance to cooperate, just dissolve them. [In that way] you are sending a message to other municipalities that are not functioning because of quarrels between the leaders because of corruption and ... poor cooperation," he said.