ANC MP Zweli Mkhize now leads the committee charged with oversight of South Africa's municipalities. Mkhize, the disgraced former health minister, was elected as Cogta committee chairperson on Wednesday. Several opposition MPs were also elected as committee chairpersons. Disgraced former Health Minister Zweli Mkhize, who left his position with a cloud of corruption over his head, is now in charge of Parliament's oversight committee, tasked with keeping a close eye on South Africa's 257 municipalities. On Wednesday, the theme of the government of national unity (GNU) was on full display as opposition MPs were among several members elected as committee chairpersons. But the day also saw the return of some old faces. Mkhize was elected unopposed as chairperson of the Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Committee. The ANC integrity committee, in 2021, recommended that Mkhize step aside until his Digital Vibes case was finalised. Mkhize, who contested for the ANC presidency post and lost out to Ramaphosa in 2022, was accused of influencing the awarding of the R150 million tender to Digital Vibes when he was health minister. READ | Tainted ministers re-elected to top parliamentary jobs, a deputy minister suffers demotion The former health minister resigned from Cabinet in August 2021. He previously served as the minister of cooperative governance and traditional affairs from 2018 to 2019. Before that, he was the fifth premier of KwaZulu-Natal from 2009 to 2013. Despite Mkhize's solid background and experience, he was among several tainted ANC leaders, whom the ANC's integrity committee recommended to be removed from the party's parliamentary list. For the opposition, it was a much happier affair. Rise Mzansi leader and former newspaper editor Songezo Zibi leads Parliament's finance watchdog, the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa). BOSA leader Mmusi Maimane was elected as chairperson of the Appropriations Committee. According to Maimane, his election is a step in the right direction. "In an era of the GNU, you've got to build a constructive opposition and you've got to ensure that there's always oversight. "Now, appropriations as a committee has a very significant role to play in making sure that the fiscal sustainability of this country is well monitored and given oversight to that much of the work that this committee has been engaged with historically, has also been inviting public inputs into the committee," he said. This was despite apparent objections from the DA. FF Plus MP Wouter Wessels was elected chairperson of the Standing Committee on the Auditor-General. Opening remarks by Mr @IanCameron23 the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police for the #7thParliament#30YearsofDemocraticParliament#30YearsofDemocracy pic.twitter.com/70CgEWhe6P — Justice-and-security-Cluster (@JustSecuCluster) July 10, 2024 In the Police Committee, Cape Town crime activist and DA MP Ian Cameron was elected as chairperson. Another DA MP, Bridget Masango, has been elected chairperson of the Social Development Committee. ANC MP Dina Pule has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, overseeing Agriculture Minister and DA leader John Steenhuisen. Pule left Cabinet in 2013 when she served as minister of communications. She had a controversial term, and when former president Jacob Zuma reshuffled his Cabinet, she was not retained. That year, Pule faced a long parliamentary probe, which found she had abused her position as minister and had lied to Parliament about her then-boyfriend benefiting from entities that fell under her department. She was fined a month's salary and forced to accept a reprimand by former National Assembly Speaker Max Sisulu. READ | Con air: Former ministers and spouses continue to claim for travel, despite benefit cut - report Meanwhile, in the Science and Innovation Committee, the EFF was fuming after the election of a chairperson was postponed. It was expected that former Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba would be elected as chairperson. But the IFP's Sanele Zondo was nominated. Zondo, however, rejected the nomination. EFF MP Vuyani Pambo accused the GNU partners of wasting money and the committee's time. "This meeting is money, not only money to the government but also to us as members. We don't take it lightly and I think this is the tone that has been set. "This is what's going to happen, going forward when the GNU does not agree, the committee cannot sit. How do we even begin to hold the executive accountable when we operate in this fashion? Let's leave the games aside," said Pambo.