Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi finally announced his cabinet after two postponements due to deadlocked negotiations with the DA. A minority government was formed with the PA, IFP and Rise Mzansi. The DA said it had pulled out of being part of a government in Gauteng because the ANC wanted to strongarm it. The ANC in Gauteng has formed a minority government after talks with the DA collapsed at the eleventh hour. On Wednesday night, an emboldened Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi announced his provincial executive committee, which excluded the DA but included Rise Mzansi, the PA, and the IFP — parties that are part of the government of national unity (GNU). This is the Gauteng executive: MEC for e-Government - Bonginkosi Dlamini (IFP) MEC for Finance and Economic Development - Lebogang Maile (ANC) MEC for Education, Sports, Arts, Culture and Recreation - Matome Chiloane (ANC) MEC for Health and Wellness - Nomantu Nkomo Ralehoko (ANC) MEC for Roads and Transport - Kedibone Diale-Tlabela (ANC) MEC for Human Settlements - Tasneem Motara (ANC) MEC for Agriculture and Rural Development - Vuyiswa Ramokgopa (Rise Mzansi) MEC for Infrastructure Development and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs - Jacob Mamabolo (ANC) MEC for Environment - Sheila Mary Peters (PA) MEC for Social Development - Faith Mazibuko (ANC) Some of the changes in Gauteng's new administration include the merging and unbundling of departments. Community safety will now be handled from Lesufi's office. The Department of Agriculture and the Environment has been split into two; the Department of Finance is on its own without the e-Government portfolio; and the Department of Sports, Arts, and Culture has been merged with education. READ | LIVE: Lesufi forms minority Gauteng Cabinet with ANC, IFP, PA and Rise Mzansi - but no DA Announcing his cabinet, Lesufi said the voters had asked political parties to work together and that they were prepared to do so. "We accept, without conditions, the outcomes of our elections and the desires of our electorate that all political parties must work together to run our provincial government. In doing so, we must be mature and sober at all times. "Hardline stances must be avoided. Openness, transparency, compromise, and communication should be the hallmark of our administration," he said. (Sharlene Rood/News24) (Sharlene Rood/News24) Lesufi said no party would be left behind in the government of provincial unity (GPU) "unless they choose not to be part of the GPU". "However, we will not close the door for any party," he added. The road to the announcement has been rocky. The ANC's poor showing in the polls meant it had to enter into power-sharing deals in KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Cape, and Gauteng. In Gauteng, the ANC obtained 34% of the votes and the DA won 28%. Lesufi postponed the announcement of his executive twice, after the DA and the ANC failed to agree on the formation of the provincial government. The announcement was expected to take place on Monday. Instead, the ANC leadership in Gauteng held a media briefing in which it accused the DA of bullying it and acting like a "spoilt brat" during negotiations. READ | Stalemate in Gauteng as DA refuses 'to be taken hostage in a government of provincial unity' On Tuesday, DA leader Hellen Zille fired back counter-accusations and claimed that the ANC had negotiated in "bad faith". She accused the party of failing to acknowledge the GNU's statement of intent, which was there to guide parties in forming a government. At the heart of the disagreements between the two parties, she said, was the ANC's failure to acknowledge two "crucial" clauses in the statement of intent. At a media briefing at Luthuli House earlier on Wednesday, Lesufi gave his version of what had led to the stalemate. He said when he was elected as the premier, the DA handed him a document containing its wish list. Panyaza Lesufi during the Gauteng government of provincial unity negotiations press briefing at Luthuli House on 3 July 2024, in Johannesburg. (Gallo Images/Sharon Seretlo) "In the document, the DA said it was going to vote for the ANC on condition that it agrees with what was contained in the document because it was this document that led to where we are today. "The document says: 'The composition of the Gauteng executive council, the premier will come from the ANC and ... seven MECs will be allocated to the ANC and other parties, and three MECs will be allocated to the DA. "The composition of the legislature, the speaker will come from the ANC, the deputy speaker from the DA, the chair of chairs will come from the DA, and the deputy chair of chairs will come from the ANC; that the principle of chairperson is based on an oversight model where when one party occupies the MEC position, the same party shall not occupy the chair of the portfolio." Lesufi said the ANC had no qualms about giving the DA the three positions it had requested. However, he added: The snag is that we told them that we had started with the document, let's continue to elect the remaining positions. Then, the DA came later and said they were withdrawing this document and wanted us to start afresh. So, when they withdrew the document, we were already at the advanced stage of consulting with other political parties. "When they came back later, we indicated that [their] withdrawal meant that we needed to engage other political parties. We engaged [with] other parties ... that is where the dispute came." Lesufi explained that the announcement of the executive was postponed twice to allow the processes to unfold. At a press conference on Wednesday, ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula told reporters that he had been optimistic that the two parties would reach a consensus. However, that was not the case. Mbalula revealed that the ANC had written to Zille to ask that the DA give the negotiations another chance, but the party ignored the request. "I said to her, 'Let's go back to the negotiation team.' I told her I would lead the negotiation team with Gauteng. We met in the afternoon. We left her [with Lesufi]. I had confidence in Panyaza, he can negotiate with anyone. I do not have to be there to police him." But, despite the intervention from the national leaders, the negotiations reached a deadlock. While Mbalula was talking, Gauteng DA leader Solly Msimanga released a statement announcing that his party would not join the GPU. "After robust engagements and negotiations stretching over weeks, we have declined to take up seats on the African National Congress' terms and will not form part of the executive of the Gauteng government of provincial unity (GPU)," he said. ??The Democratic Alliance in Gauteng must, under all circumstances, align with our principles. We will not go into any arrangement that corrupts our goal of good governance and bringing about meaningful change. ??Read more here: https://t.co/7Q8N67HHOh pic.twitter.com/CLlSjvRChx — DA Gauteng (@DAGauteng) July 3, 2024 He added that the DA found the ANC's offer "unfair and unreasonable". READ | Mbalula says Gauteng premier will announce his Cabinet - with or without the DA Despite the failed talks, newly sworn-in Human Settlements MEC and ANC deputy provincial secretary Tasneem Motara said the ANC's decision to form a minority government would not prevent it from engaging with other political parties represented in the legislature. Motara said: Negotiations are an ongoing process ... even with partners. We've got to continuously negotiate, communicate, and work together, so it does not mean because we have agreed to establish a government that the relationship is now [carved] in stone for the next five years. "There will be contentious [issues] that we may not necessarily agree on ... for example, the budget," she said. Motara added that the ANC would continuously negotiate in good faith to keep the GPU intact for the next five years. She added that the ANC in Gauteng believed its relationship with the DA was not fractured. "The deputy speaker of the legislature, which is a critical position, is a member of the Democratic Alliance, and there are members of the Democratic Alliance who will still form part of the legislature if they so wish, in terms of positions as chairpersons of committees. "All of us in the African National Congress have really said over and over that the election results reflect South Africa's wish for all parties to work together, and so we cannot do it alone as the African National Congress. We have to work with other parties," she said. Political analyst Mpumelelo Mkhabela told News24 that to survive, the Gauteng minority government was going to need additional backing, either from the DA, EFF, or MK Party in the legislature. "For as long as none of these parties is represented in the cabinet, [Lesufi] will lead an insecure government. The risk of an off-the-books deal for 'confidence and supply' with parties not represented in the cabinet, is that it can lead to toxic political extortion between the confidence supplier and the government." A minority government could be kept in office through a "confidence-and-supply" agreement with minority parties that would support the ANC in motions of no confidence and budget appropriations and related financial matters. "For the benefit of the public and to ensure transparency and accountability, any confidence-and-supply arrangement must be made public," said Mkhabela.