President Cyril Ramaphosa described the swearing in of the ministers and deputy ministers forming the government of national unity on Wednesday as a "fresh start". DA leader and Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen said political parties would have to display maturity for the collegiality on display on Wednesday to last the full five-year term. Former opposition parties view participating in the Cabinet as an opportunity to have their policies considered in government. President Cyril Ramaphosa believes the government of national unity (GNU) he leads is a "fresh start for all of us in South Africa". Ramaphosa conceded efforts to establish a GNU were difficult and complicated, but in the end, they were a satisfying journey, not only for him but also for the nation. "This is a truly historic moment where we have brought together people who opposed each other during the elections, who have now sworn to work together," he said, shortly after his executive was sworn in by Chief Justice Raymond Zondo on Wednesday afternoon at the Cape Town International Convention Centre. "So, as the president and the leader of the executive, I'm a very happy man that we have mashed together all this brain power to work for the people of South Africa." Regarding the GNU's various policy positions, Ramaphosa said they were clear, as set out in various manifestos. "We are going as we said in the statement of intent to put the key priorities of what South Africans expect. "All that is going to be synchronised [and] properly set out. When we open Parliament, we will be setting out the real programme of this national unity government," he added. WATCH | New Cabinet ministers ready to 'serve the country' in government of national unity Before the swearing-in ceremony, former political foes could be seen greeting each other warmly. DA leader and Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen shares a moment with SACP leader and Science and Technology Minister Blade Nzimande (in the cap, bottom right) and his wife, Phumelele Ntombela-Nzimande. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 "Hello, Blade!" exclaimed DA leader John Steenhuisen when he saw SACP leader and Science and Technology Minister Blade Nzimande and introduced him to his wife, Terry Steenhuisen. Whether this spirit of collegiality would last for the term of five years, came down to the maturity of the political parties, Steenhuisen told News24. "One of the things that we are going to have to deal with, very quickly, upfront, is how we deal with differences of opinion within the Cabinet. "The Cabinet must be a place where different opinions are brought to the table, and we have to find a way, if we cannot find consensus, to break deadlock. That is something that we must grapple with very soon," he said. Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Dean Macpherson of the DA shakes Mineral Resources Minister and ANC national chairperson Gwede Mantashe's hand. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 "I think we can go the distance. I think the other thing that helps is what is sitting on the other side of the benches of Parliament. "There you have a party, and parties, that want to unstitch the Constitution, tear it up, dilute the rule of law, and replace elected leaders with appointed leaders. These are all very dangerous things that should worry freedom-loving individuals and people who are at the vanguard of democracy. "What we need to do is to ensure the rational centre holds, because if you open the door for that to come in, we can damage the country irreparably, as we've seen happen where those policies and practices have been applied," Steenhuisen said. He was sworn in as agriculture minister and wants to use this portfolio to create jobs. (Sharlene Rood/News24) IFP spokesperson Mkhuleko Hlengwa was sworn in as deputy transport minister, and he described the formation of a GNU as the start of a new era in South Africa. "By and large, we believe that the country should take confidence that we have been able to arrive at an agreement so speedily. "Obviously, the next five years are about negotiations, engagements, compromises and finding common ground in the greater collective interest of the country. "And we are committed to that. And I think in the areas the IFP has been deployed, we'll certainly do our level best to make sure that the national interest takes priority." IFP leader Velenkosini Hlabisa is sworn in as cooperative governance and traditional affairs minister. (Luke Daniel/News24) News24 Hlengwa said constituting the executive was important because it gave structure to the democratic framework. "And it is now incumbent on all the members of the executive to hit the ground running and get the job done," he added. READ | Biden commends Ramaphosa on GNU, commits to work closely with seventh administration Sports, Arts, and Culture Minister Gayton McKenzie said his appointment was a win for all those who wanted to take sports and the arts seriously. "There's going to be a huge change in that department. The status quo will change with me there," he added. McKenzie said the country should not run away from issues affecting coloured people. PA leader and Sport, Arts and Culture Minister Gayton McKenzie hugs Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 "I am not a coloured minister here; I have never stood for coloured people alone. All I wanted was for coloured people to also have a seat at the table. Now we have a seat at the table. "We never want to oppress our white people or black people. So, it's not about coloured people, but people get intimidated when coloured people are unhappy," he added. FF Plus leader Pieter Groenewald admitted his appointment as correctional services minister came as a surprise, as his party had never negotiated with the ANC for positions, and in fact turned down MEC positions in the Northern Cape. FF Plus leader and Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 But then, at 19:10 on Sunday, he got a call from the president, offering him a Cabinet position. The Cabinet announcement was scheduled for 21:00 but took place closer to 22:00. "I had to urgently find my federal executive committee to have a meeting, And then we decided, very well, we're in the government of national unity, we can contribute. This was a new offer, it took us by surprise, and then it was decided that I would take the position." Groenewald said it meant they could put their policy positions on the agenda. READ | Government of national unity: Has the era of compromise dawned? He added he was taking on a challenging portfolio, and corruption was number one on his list of priorities, saying he also wanted to improve rehabilitation programmes. "We have to put effective rehabilitation in place, because our facilities are overcrowded. We must get our people to be reintegrated in society and to make a contribution to the future of South Africa. It is a big challenge, but there are methods." Groenewald said he was convinced the vast majority of correctional services staff were hardworking and honest. He added he would speak to unions to ensure those staff qualities were utilised to root out corruption. GOOD leader Patricia de Lille served in Ramaphosa's Cabinet during the sixth administration. She returns as tourism minister and said she would continue to clean up the department. GOOD leader and Tourism Minister Patricia de Lille and the DA's Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Dean Macpherson. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 Asked about her working relationship with the DA, De Lille said she would rise above petty politics. "That is our task and where we need to get together, we need to respect each other." Pemmy Majodina was the ANC's chief whip in the sixth Parliament. On Wednesday, she was sworn in as water and sanitation minister. She said did not expect an easy task. "Water is a challenge not only in South Africa, but globally. The effects of global warming and climate change are some of the matters that affect us and therefore, we must work together with municipalities to ensure that water provision does not get compromised," Majodina added. The DA's Leon Schreiber, who is now the home affairs minister, drove the DA's campaign against cadre deployment. This involved litigation to obtain the ANC's cadre deployment records and to have the practice outlawed. Schreiber said this litigation, which is already before the court, would continue to run its course. "The problems there didn't disappear overnight. So, of course, we also have a separation between party and state and getting hold of those records and enforcing a possible court order against that practice is an issue that involves a political party. So, those processes continue, and of course, we will have to see the outcome of that." Home Affairs Minister Leon Schreiber. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 He said his position was a great opportunity to tackle cadre deployment in a specific department. "I must say that my initial interactions - I've already had a meeting with the top officials in the department - have been positive. "There are good people in the home affairs department, and I think the challenge is going to be to elevate people who have had a very hard-working environment for a long time in these departments as well by really showing them that this new minister, this new administration, is coming with that non-political lens. "We're looking for professionals and people who can contribute to the department. Of course, I have been clear as well that where people don't want to cooperate, where they don't want to drive the vision, it's up to them to decide whether they want to be part of it or not. "But the idea that people are going to be hounded out or all tarred with the same brush, that's not how we’re approaching it. We want to find excellence and make it actually better to be a good official, while of course, having that zero tolerance of maladministration." PA leader and Sport, Arts and Culture Minister Gayton McKenzie shares a light moment with Defence Minister Angie Motshekga. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 After 15 years as basic education minister, Angie Motshekga has now moved to the defence and military veterans portfolio. While she was shocked when Ramaphosa asked her to take up this position, she is unfazed by this move. "I think I'm fine." The military's financing has long been a matter of concern. "Fortunately, strangely enough, the finance minister [the returning Enoch Godongwana] just said to me now, as soon as we're settled, there is money that has been identified to be allocated to defence. "So, I think, part of our problems will be resolved. Not fully, but I just think it will be the beginning of just sorting out those resource-related matters," Motshekga said after the swearing-in ceremony. One of her deputies, UDM leader Bantu Holomisa, has a strong military background, and is referred to as "the general". Motshekga said she did not expect "any difficulties" working with him. "I just said to him, we are going there as civilians. He's not going there as a soldier," she added. "We are going there as political heads and civilians. He's not coming there as a general. The general is in the army." International Relations and Cooperation Minister Ronald Lamola arrives for the swearing-in ceremony (Luke Daniel/News24) News24 Another minister moving to a new portfolio is Ronald Lamola, who leaves the justice portfolio to fill what he described as the big shoes of Naledi Pandor as the international relations and cooperation minister. Lamola said they would continue with current government policy and continue to pursue the African Union's Agenda 2063 and represent the country on other international bodies. "We also have to look after our national interests and ensure that as a country we continue on the foundation laid by our Constitution, human rights, our diplomacy across the world also ensure that we advance our economic bilaterals in many parts of the world, so that it can help us resolve our own domestic challenges." Ramaphosa is expected to convene his GNU Cabinet's first lekgotla in the coming week. The Opening of Parliament Address, where he will outline the government's programme for the coming term, will be on 18 July.