In the first debate of the seventh Parliament, Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi advocated passionately for National Health Insurance. The ANC's GNU partners, the DA and FF Plus, expressed their opposition to the controversial policy. From outside the GNU, the EFF used the contradiction to paint the ANC as beholden to "the market-driven illogic of their masters, the Democratic Alliance". The first parliamentary debate since the formation of the government of national unity (GNU) laid bare the policy contradictions among the GNU parties, with the controversial National Health Insurance (NHI) Act the bone of contention. President Cyril Ramaphosa signed the NHI Act into law two weeks before the elections, despite a chorus of resistance from medical practitioners, the business community and opposition parties. The DA, which staunchly opposed the Bill since its inception, said that it would go to court to stop the law. On Thursday morning, a mini-plenary of the National Assembly debated the Department of Health budget. Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi delivered an impassioned motivation for NHI. READ | Mandela ended 'pension apartheid', now NHI will end 'apartheid healthcare' - Ramaphosa Motsoaledi, a medical doctor who served in the ministerial position from 2009 to 2019, has returned to the portfolio after a stint at home affairs in the previous administration. He said that upon his return, he had been asked about his priorities for the portfolio on several occasions. "For my part, I have given and will always give a standard answer for the health sector. Priorities and plans have been outlined years ago by the supreme body on health, the World Health Organisation (WHO). "These outlined priorities of health apply globally to any Minister of Health. According to the WHO, a health system anywhere in the world consists of six building blocks. You may call them six pillars of health. These are: leadership and governance; access to essential medicines and other commodities; health workforce; health systems financing; health information systems; health service delivery." He said while there was generally agreement about five of the pillars, the one on financing "has generated a lot of heat and sometimes fury in some quarters". "In our country, we have decided to call this NHI. Some believe it is a system of health which South Africa is not ready for. Others believe it is a vintage, very expensive health system for which there is no money in the country," said Motsoaledi. "Let us clarify once more, NHI is a health financing system, called universal health coverage (UHC) by the WHO. It is a health financing system, which is meant to be an equaliser between the rich and the poor. "There is no debate at all that South Africa is the most unequal society in the whole world. If you want to see what inequality means, come to the health sector in South Africa. Within the borders of the same country, some are getting world-class healthcare, while others get such poor healthcare you may believe we live in different countries. "We can no longer with our eyes open sustain such gross inequality. If there is something we can do about it, we must do it here and now, and not in some distant ill-defined future." DA MP Michéle Clarke said her party had "always advocated for quality healthcare for our people". "But it is of critical importance that we strengthen public partnerships with the private sector to achieve these objectives." She said NHI in its current form was unaffordable and needed to be urgently reviewed. She added: The introduction of the NHI is a monumental shift. The DA has warned against the potential devastation that the NHI could cause and urges the committee to thoroughly scrutinise preparatory work funded through the NHI in direct grants. According to Clarke, implementing NHI would not mask the immediate need for transparency, accountability and efficient use of resources in the country's current healthcare system. "The DA will continue to hold the government accountable, we will fight for a health budget that truly reflects the needs of our people, ensuring that every South African has access to quality healthcare." In his maiden speech, new DA MP Karl le Roux said he spent most of his professional life as a medical doctor in a rural public hospital in the Eastern Cape. "Too many of our health policies are out of touch with the realities on the ground and are not implementable," he said. "The NHI Bill is a classic example of this. The DA fully supports the principles of universal healthcare that undergird the NHI. But we believe South Africa has neither the capacity nor the finances to implement the NHI Bill as it currently stands. "Furthermore, the complexity of implementing the NHI would distract provinces from their core role of improving the quality of their healthcare to the residents and in the day to day, will harm the poor." READ | John Steenhuisen: Why we are going to court to stop the NHI from destroying healthcare They were backed up by fellow GNU member party, the FF Plus. FF Plus MP Philip van Staden said that while his party would play an active role in the GNU, it reserved the right to criticise. He said mismanagement and corruption had destroyed our public healthcare institutions. "The FF Plus will strive to establish cooperation between the private and public healthcare sectors so that expertise and services can be pooled," he said. "The FF Plus' view remains steadfast that the NHI would not succeed in improving public healthcare. Instead, it would do the opposite." Like the DA, another GNU member, the IFP, came out strongly against NHI in its final rally before the elections. However, in her speech during the debate, new IFP MP Nompumelelo Mhlongo didn't mention NHI at all. "The IFP calls for the new government to ensure that the public healthcare is prioritised as well as the working conditions of medical staff and the overall condition of equipment at public hospitals," she said. READ | Can a new government repeal the NHI Act? – constitutional law expert weighs in The EFF used the clear fissure between the two major GNU partners to advance the notion that the ANC was beholden to the DA. According to EFF MP Suzan Thembekwayo, NHI doesn't go far enough to address the inequality in South Africa's healthcare provision. "For the past 30 years, this group of people entrusted with power by our people has been hellbent on replacing a white exploitative class with a black one. Their intention has always been to sit at the table of the oppressor, not to deal with the oppression. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the provision of health in this country," she said. "We need free and quality universal healthcare for everyone. "The National Health Insurance Act, signed into law just before the election, is an insufficient, legislative measure and will only enrich private hospitals and not improve the quality of services in public institutions. And besides, even the implementation of this limited measure is now under threat with the submission of the ANC into the hegemony of the market-driven illogic of their masters, the Democratic Alliance." Motsoaledi disagreed with her assertion that NHI would enrich private hospitals. "Private hospitals are enriched now, as I'm speaking," he said. He did, however, find agreement with one of the other parties outside the GNU. In his maiden speech, ActionSA MP Kgosi Letlape, a medical doctor and former president of the Health Professions Council of South Africa, said public servants, including the Cabinet and MPs, should get their medical care from the public health sector. "I can assure you, if all of us get our services from the public sector, what we find there will stop," he said. Letlape added: If our lives are on the line, we will ensure the public health system works. So, what we need to do is to fix what we have. Motsoaledi said he had often advocated for this at continental bodies. "As members of Parliament, we need to be treated where our people are treated. Then we'll understand what's going on," Motsoaledi said. While the ANC, DA and FF Plus have clearly not found each other on the biggest tenet of government health policy, Ramaphosa has convened a Cabinet lekgotla for this coming weekend. Last week, Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni said the Forum of South Africa Directors-General had analysed the manifestos of GNU parties, and would submit a proposal for consideration and adoption at the Cabinet lekgotla. This will be the programme that the government will collectively implement.