President Cyril Ramaphosa says the GNU will focus on ending poverty and the high cost of living. Ramaphosa was addressing the opening of Parliament on Thursday. The president said many South Africans still lived in poverty, and the government would look at addressing that. President Cyril Ramaphosa has committed the government of national unity (GNU) to prioritise tackling poverty and the high cost of living to assist South Africans who are living in abject poverty. Ramaphosa said this would include reviewing the fuel price formula to identify areas where food prices could be reduced. Speaking at the opening of Parliament on Thursday, he announced reducing poverty and tackling the high cost of living would be the second priority of the GNU's three strategies over the next five years. "An effective, integrated, and comprehensive poverty alleviation strategy is necessary to provide protection and support to the most vulnerable in society." He added: "Even at a time when many companies are making large profits, millions of South Africans are suffering as a result of rising prices." Speaking after he appointed a Cabinet which includes GNU parties such as the DA, UDM, PAC, ANC, and PA, he said the government would work to expand the basket of essential food items to be exempted from VAT. "Asset poverty is one of the underlying causes of abject poverty, which exacerbates the high cost of living among our people. "Income poverty is also one of the underlying causes of poverty," said Ramaphosa. READ | Nine key take-outs from Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address The president added while poverty could be ended by people having jobs, the R350 Social Relief of Distress (SRD) grant was one of the key interventions to assist the unemployed. He described the SRD as a "lifeline" for millions of unemployed South Africans. "We will use this grant as a basis for the introduction of a sustainable form of income support for unemployed people to address the challenge of income poverty." However, a R350 grant, introduced as an intervention during Covid-19, does not even cover the average food basket cost. According to a Household Affordability Index by Economic Justice & Dignity, the average cost of a basket of 17 core food items prioritised and bought first by households was R2 837.56 in January 2024. That is R498.73 more expensive than the R2 338.83 it cost them in January 2022. This was a 21% increase in the total cost of the basket. Looking at all the individual food items, the average price increase was 26%. Ramaphosa said the government would look at other social assistance to assist impoverished people. He added the GNU government would also ensure that municipalities "properly implement the indigent policy" to ensure the elderly, poor, and infirm received assistance with paying for basic services.