In the debate on the Public Service and Administration budget, parties to the GNU sang from the same hymn sheet. This was met with open hostility from the MK Party and EFF, with EFF MP Busisiwe Mkhwebane claiming it is against Parliament's rules to refer to the GNU or statement of intent. EFF MPs drowned out part of Public Service and Administration Minister Mzamo Buthelezi's conclusion to the debate. Public Service and Administration Minister Mzamo Buthelezi says he will not be "derailed" by "people harbouring bitterness because of their poor political judgment" before the EFF's shouting drowned out the conclusion of his department's budget vote debate. The Public Service and Administration budget vote debate on Friday was characterised by a clear rapprochement between the parties forming the GNU, which was met by open hostility by the MK Party and EFF. Buthelezi said he was appointed to "drive the reforms and improvements that will be important in realising the goals in rebuilding public trust in a purpose-driven public service". He defined his priorities as follows: Improve the trust in government and government services and decisively dealing with corruption and corrupt officials and swiftly act against those abusing the state. Improving discipline management to ensure that fair processes are completed timeously because it is unacceptable that senior management within the departments are on lengthy suspensions at the cost of taxpayers while sitting at home and litigating their way through the system. Lifestyle audits must be conducted across the board when the system is abused for personal and selfish gains. Modernisation of our service delivery monitoring system to ensure that complaints are handled efficiently. We need a government-wide system that will identify gaps where departments are lagging and reward those departments that are working efficiently. Modernisation of the public service through the digitisation and the use of information communication technologies, including e-recruitment, HR management and delivery of government services. Partnering with organised labour to ensure that the collective bargaining system works towards improving the needs of public servants and government services. Improving the health and welfare of public servants by ensuring their wellbeing, including on matters of mental health. "We are convinced that by targeting the above mentioned areas, we can build a professional public service driven by a strong sense of purpose, professionalism and commitment," he said. Buthelezi added South Africans deserved a public service that was professional, functional and driven by a deep sense of commitment for the greater good. After he left the podium, MK Party MP Moshome Motubatse indicated he wanted to ask a question. Deputy Speaker Annelie Lotriet said he was supposed to ask his question during Buthelezi's speech. Motubatse posed his question, nonetheless. "The question of what the minister actually said in respect of the government of national unity is an issue of concern to me, because as the MK Party, the implication thereof is that the government is a… "If he contextualise it, in that particular fashion, it simply means he is actually partisan in the approach of everything that the Department of Public Administration is going to do. "So, it is a relevant question that actually needs to be asked, because if it is partisan, then the delivery of the public services in the exclusion, is not going to be throughout the government, but is actually going to be going to the parties that are in the government of national unity," Motubatse said. HIGHLIGHTS | MINISTER BUTHELEZI DELIVERS THE BUDGET VOTE SPEECH FOR THE MINISTRY FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION #MPSABudgetVote2024 pic.twitter.com/sW1HCOLDQt — DPSA, RSA (@thedpsa) July 12, 2024 Lotriet added it was a matter of debate or better left to ask the minister during a committee meeting. The next speaker was ANC MP Phindisile Xaba-Ntshaba. "We are confident that our government will continue to protect the rights of workers under the government of national unity." Motubatse again interrupted. "Can we just get clarity on the government of national unity? What does it mean. It is an exclusion of us who are actually here representing our people, because, that is a partisan approach, it is sugar-coated to mean it is actually a government exclusively only for those parties that the ANC co-opted?" Lotriet said it was not related to the order of the day and advised him to deal with it during his party's time in the debate or to take it up in the committee. She added it was her final ruling on the matter. READ | GNU contradictions: Parties clash over NHI in first debate of seventh Parliament DA MP Jan de Villiers, who was elected as the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration's chairperson this week, was the next speaker. "Many said it would be impossible, yet here we are. A working government of national unity. An arrangement with an IFP minister, an ANC deputy minister and a chairperson of the portfolio [committee] from the DA," he said. "This arrangement is the direct result of the GNU partners reflecting the will of the people to form a government that needs to ensure stability and peace, tackle the triple problem of poverty, unemployment and inequality and build a true non-racial, non-sexist, united and democratic society. "It is our responsibility to protect the rule of law and the Constitution, especially against those, present in this House who would gladly tear it up, and burn it down. "Chair, put in the simplest of terms, it is the urgent and important task of this new government of national unity to improve the lives of South Africans. "Unemployment, poverty and inequality can only be truly tackled if the state has the ability to deliver services fairly and equally to all its citizens." MK Party MP Edward Nzimande said the party rejected the budget. "This government, the Sixth Administration [sic], together obviously, with its incapacitated government of national unity will fail as it has failed to deal with issues that deal with discipline," he added. "In relation when it relates to the premiers who have a joint function to appoint MECs, sorry to appoint heads of department at level 15 of hospitals CEOs. "We are sitting with a situation, for example in Gauteng, where at three big academic hospitals, three CEOs have no qualification. "This was brought to the attention by some organisations who are also now in the GNU, and nothing has happened. "The Public Service Commission has failed to intervene and deal with that. And we don't believe there shall be an improvement in terms of the quality of the service delivery if the incorrect people are placed in the incorrect positions." Nzimande said a "cadre that will have all the tools and resources to be able to deal with the challenges that are faced by the vulnerable or the poor" was needed in the public sector. READ | Support GNU to ensure 'decisions are made in interests of SA', PSC tells public servants EFF MP Sixolisa Gcilishe added: "The EFF refuses to be part of this disorganisation that this GNU is already displaying, taking the baton from the failed Thuma Mina brigade. "This government has no political will to eradicate poverty and youth unemployment, because if they did, the budget would reflect the plan to establish a state-owned housing construction company, a state-owned roads construction company, and even state-owned pharmaceutical companies." FF Plus MP Heloïse Denner said: "We're on the eve of renewal in our country, our government, our departments and our public service. Minister Buthelezi and Deputy Minister [Pinky] Kekana, South Africans gave us the mandate to turn this department around. It is now or never." Kekana added professionalising the public administration was one of the key imperatives for building a capable state. She said: And I'm saying to honourable members from MK and EFF, watch this space. An EFF MP raised a point of order. "Is she threatening us now?" he asked. Lotriet said that particular expression was not a threat. Closing the debate, Buthelezi added South Africans could now see who had their best interests at heart. Nzimande raised a point of order in isiZulu, but Lotriet said the interpretation services were not working. EFF MP disgraced former Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane then raised what she considered a point of order. "Therefore, chairperson, can the minister, and any other, refrain from using the statement of intents and government of national unity because that is not part of our rules," she said. Lotriet added the GNU matter was raised earlier and she gave a final ruling on that when Mkhwebane was not present in the House. While Lotriet was still speaking, Mkhwebane interrupted her. EFF MP Reneiloe Mashabane said Buthelezi raised the issue of the GNU using isiZulu. Lotriet added she would refer to the Hansard with the correct translation and come back with a ruling in the appropriate forum. EFF MP Lillian Managa said it could not be correct Lotriet had to refer to the Hansard. Managa added: We can't allow you to go on in this way. While Lotriet was trying to respond, Gcilishe started speaking in isiZulu without being recognised. Motubatse accused Lotriet of disrespecting "our languages". Lotriet said there were three simultaneous sessions and Parliament did not have sufficient translators, adding she would take it up and agreed it was unacceptable. She asked Buthelezi to conclude. He said: We are not worried and we are not going to be shaken. This country is going to be taken forward. We have a commitment to our people, we have a commitment to our constituencies. "And we shall not be allowed to be derailed, Deputy Speaker, by people harbouring bitterness because of their poor political judgment." Mkhwebane wanted to raise another point of order, and Lotriet did not recognise her. EFF MPs started screaming, and little of the rest of Buthelezi's address could be heard. "Honourable members, I cannot take points of order if you are shouting because I cannot hear you," said Lotriet to the EFF MPs after Buthelezi concluded.