President Cyril Ramaphosa said "a broad range of parties, from across the political spectrum, will constitute a government". The executive includes leaders and members from eight parties, other than the ANC. Several of these parties indicated they wanted to use their involvement to advance their policy positions. An era of compromise has dawned on South African governance as President Cyril Ramaphosa announced an executive containing several leaders of former opposition parties, who all want their policies to be heard. For the first 30 years of democracy, backed up by a majority, the ANC had the sole prerogative on setting the national policy agenda. But now, several of the eight other parties also represented in the executive have indicated that they, too, want to give their policy input. Ramaphosa announced his national executive on Sunday evening, following three weeks of intense negotiations. Cabinet is comprised of the president, the deputy president and ministers. It does not include the deputy ministers, but combined they form the executive. Ramaphosa said that, in forming the national executive, several factors were considered, including ensuring that "all the parties are able to participate meaningfully in the national executive and that the diversity of the views of South Africans is properly reflected". "We want South Africans to see themselves reflected not only in the composition of government, but also in its policies and programmes," he said. However, Ramaphosa pointed out that none of the executive members "has been appointed to serve the interests of a particular constituency, a particular party or a particular section of society". On Monday morning, Ramaphosa's weekly newsletter was titled "A new era of partnership and national unity". "This is the first time in South Africa's history that such a broad range of parties, from across the political spectrum, will constitute a government," wrote Ramaphosa. READ | FIRST TAKE: Making the GNU work - Is this Ramaphosa's time? He noted that the partnership between the parties forming the government of national unity (GNU) was guided by a statement of intent, which outlined fundamental principles and a minimum programme of priorities. "All the parties have made a commitment to respect the Constitution and to promote a accountable and transparent governance, evidence-based policy and decision-making, the professionalisation of the public service, integrity and good governance. "The incoming government will prioritise rapid, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, and the creation of a more just society by tackling poverty and inequality. It will continue the economic reforms that are under way in key industries like electricity, telecommunication, water and transport." Ramaphosa added: While the ministers and deputy ministers who make up the national executive come from different parties, they will be expected to serve the people as a whole. They will be expected to implement a shared mandate and a common programme of action. Ramaphosa said the new government would soon hold its first lekgotla to "collectively develop" the programme of government for the next five years, which he would outline in greater detail in his Opening of Parliament Address on 18 July. DA leader John Steenhuisen was appointed as Ramaphosa's agriculture minister – one of six DA ministers, the others being Siviwe Gwarube (basic education), Leon Schreiber (home affairs), Solly Malatsi (communications and digital technologies), Dion George (environment, forestry and fisheries), and Dean Macpherson (public works and infrastructure). DA members were appointed as deputy ministers in the following portfolios: finance; trade, industry and competition; higher education; energy and electricity; water and sanitation; and small business development. "The sheer weight and spread of these 12 portfolios amount to a recognition that the DA has a meaningful and vital role to play in the reconstruction of our country," Steenhuisen said in an "address to the nation" on Monday morning. "The DA was never in this for positions for their own sake, which is why we refused to accept watered-down compromises, and why we drove a hard bargain at times to ensure that the portfolios we get are of real substance." OPINION | Ryan Coetzee: Power-sharing in practice: Painful sacrifice on the cards for ANC and DA Steenhuisen was also pleased that the negotiations reaffirmed the agreed-upon mechanism to break deadlocks "on policy matters, that any suspicious tenders issued in departments now under DA control will be swiftly investigated, and that senior civil service appointments will not be obstructed or politicised". He said that, throughout the negotiations, the DA pursued a clear, two-pronged strategic objective. "Our dual objective was to ensure that we secured meaningful influence in government, while delivering on our election pledge to rescue South Africa from parties that seek to tear up our country's Constitution." Other party leaders in Cabinet are the IFP's Velenkosini Hlabisa (cooperative governance and traditional affairs), the FF Plus' Pieter Groenewald (correctional services), GOOD's Patricia de Lille (tourism), the PAC's Mzwanele Nyhontso (land reform and rural development), and PA leader Gayton McKenzie (sport, arts and culture). Party leaders Ganief Hendricks, of Al Jamah-ah, and Bantu Holomisa, of the UDM, were appointed as deputy ministers of social development and defence and military veterans, respectively. In a statement, Groenewald said he was "in Cabinet to demonstrate its willingness to fulfil its role in the GNU to facilitate stability and progress in the country". "The party's participation in the executive authority will ensure that the right policy is implemented to create equal opportunities for everyone in the country," he said. Groenewald added: The decision was also made to promote the FF Plus' policy directions, with the sole aim of rebuilding South Africa and getting it back on the right track. "The party found itself in an extraordinary position, where it had to choose between merely fulfilling an opposition role or actively participating in deliberations in Cabinet to determine policy and legislation to benefit every single person in South Africa." GOOD secretary-general Brett Herron said his party agreed to support the GNU, "not in the expectation of being rewarded with positions, but to contribute constructively to the country's transition to a new era of power-sharing". "Our support for the GNU won't come at the cost of muting our voice. GOOD will continue advocating for social, economic, spatial and environmental justice." Al Jamah-ah secretary-general Faried Achmat said Hendricks had long been a "stalwart advocate for social welfare and community empowerment throughout his tenure, demonstrating unwavering dedication to the principles of compassion, equity, and progress". "As deputy minister of social development, Hendricks will undoubtedly continue to champion policies that enhance social welfare, uplift vulnerable communities, and promote sustainable development across the nation," he said. READ | Mpumelelo Mkhabela: Will it be a government of national unity or division? While Rise Mzansi was part of the GNU, it was not represented in the executive. The party, nonetheless, intended to take the opportunity to influence policy. "We believe the GNU presents a unique opportunity for collaboration, and to influence the implementation of the issues found in the Rise Mzansi People's Manifesto," said party leader Songezo Zibi. The issues they intend to focus on include addressing hunger and food insecurity; freeing communities from crime and violence; delivering spatial and land justice; and delivering economic justice to millions of South Africans. READ| DA's Steenhuisen rallies for collaboration around GNU Cabinet With all these parties wanting to influence policy, the statement of intent's deadlock-breaking mechanism will be key. "The GNU shall take decisions in accordance with the established practice of consensus. Where no consensus is possible, the principle of sufficient consensus shall apply," reads the statement. According to the document, sufficient consensus exists when all parties have had the opportunity to express their views; despite reasonable attempts to resolve disagreements, and find common ground, there is no general consensus; parties to the GNU representing 60% of seats in the National Assembly agree; and any party that disagrees has been able to formally record their objections. The requirement that parties representing 60% of the seats in the National Assembly should agree means that the ANC - with 40% - and the DA - with 22% - would have to find each other.