Tension is mounting in the government of provincial unity in KwaZulu-Natal. The ANC says IFP leader and Cogta MEC Thulasizwe Buthelezi is abusing his office. But Buthelezi has hit back, saying that "the presence of the GPU must not give Mr Mtolo the illusion that the ANC is still in power". A row has broken out between KwaZulu-Natal government partners, the ANC and IFP, over IFP Cogta MEC Thulasizwe Buthelezi's shake-up of administrators and officials in key municipalities. The two parties formed a government of provincial unity (GPU) along with the DA and the NFP after the MK Party obliterated the ANC's support in the province in the May general elections. READ | COALITION NATION: Ntuli appoints IFP leaders to key portfolios, including highly contentious Cogta On Wednesday, the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal issued a statement in which it accused Buthelezi of abusing his office to purge staff at some municipalities. ANC provincial secretary Bheki Mtolo condemned "the weaponisation" of Cogta in a "campaign to turn municipalities into a fiefdom of a dominant grouping that is operating like a criminal syndicate". He said Buthelezi was a "risk" to the GPU's stability. "We view the removal, replacement and appointment of administrators, municipal managers and chief financial officers by MEC Thulasizwe Buthelezi without following due processes as reckless and illegal," he added. Mtolo said: In particular, the MEC has no authority to appoint [as] an acting municipal manager, Ms AB Mnikathi, and acting financial officer, BW Ndlovu, in the Nongoma Local Municipality. "We have been informed that the intention is to ensure that procurement processes are manipulated and that municipal resources are diverted for the benefit of a criminal syndicate. It is a well-known fact that the lack of accountability and maladministration are the main causes of severe deterioration in good governance in many municipalities." In the previous administration, the IFP and the ANC bickered over former Cogta MEC Bongiwe Sithole-Moloi's influence in councils. The IFP accused her of abusing her office to the advantage of the ANC. Buthelezi hit back at Mtolo, reminding him that the ANC had lost power in the general elections. But Mtolo said Buthelezi was introducing a "new culture" in which the Cogta department was "the perpetrator of maladministration". READ | Cogta Minister Hlabisa, provincial officials assess KZN fire damage estimated to cost R90 million He said the ANC had engaged with IFP leaders to ensure that the matter was addressed urgently. "No individual must be allowed to threaten the stability of the government of provincial unity. The MEC cannot be [a] law unto himself. He now operates like an excited, untrained gun holder that shoot[s] randomly in crowded places." Mtolo also accused Buthelezi of "elevating himself" above the GPU leadership. "We want to remind him that no party in the GPU was able to obtain an outright majority. Therefore, he should not act as if he is the alpha and omega of the PGU," he said. "As the ANC, we must hasten to point out that the [GPU] leadership collective... must work together to sustain the bubbling feeling of optimism about a better future under the GPU." But Buthelezi countered: The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal lost power on 29 May this year. The presence of the GPU must not give Mr Mtolo the illusion that the ANC is still in power in KwaZulu-Natal. The days are gone when Mr Mtolo would bark orders to MECs and HODs in the province. Buthelezi said he served at the pleasure of Premier Thami Ntuli. He added that since he assumed office 30 days ago, he has been "startled" by the evidence of corruption and maladministration that was the "order of the day" in the sixth administration. "A forensic investigation into procurement and employment violations between January 2023 to May 2024 would most likely lead to criminal charges being laid against senior ANC leaders in the province," he said." "If I were Mr Mtolo I would keep quiet, since the information at my disposal implicates even himself in the saga of the resignation of the former HOD and his subsequent unlawful secondment to national government."