Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald promised to address security lapses in prisons following a viral video of an inmate boasting about a comfortable life. The inmate, Bornface Banks, was transferred to a maximum-security facility. He was also charged under the Correctional Services Act for illegal possession of a cellphone, highlighting a significant security breach. FF Plus leader and Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald has pledged to address security lapses in South African prisons. This commitment follows the circulation of a video showing an inmate at Goodwood Prison, boasting about his comfortable lifestyle, which gained widespread attention this week. READ | Divided reception: Ramaphosa's Parliament opening sparks praise and criticism Bornface Banks got South Africans enraged when he recorded himself using a cellphone and bragging about living a comfortable life in the Cape Town prison. In the video, Banks can be heard stating that the inmates were doing "extremely fine", before saying they had had breakfast and lunch and were about to have dinner. He also said they received free food, toiletries and education, all courtesy of the taxpayer. The video also prompted a raid at the prison on Thursday morning this week. Banks was later transferred to a maximum security prison. Groenewald spoke to News24 before President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday evening, and insisted that Banks would "not do it again". He said: He won't do it again. I immediately asked for action. The person or the prisoner has been removed from the facility. He is also charged in terms of the Correctional Services Act for illegally possessing a cellphone. I am waiting for a report about how it happened. Because that means there's a security breach, so I will deal decisively with matters like that. The minister said he was also aware that correctional services officials were involved in security breaches and urged those with integrity to report wrongdoing. "There are hardworking, good people, employees with integrity. They must come forward. If they know about corruption, then if they can get proof or see something happen. If somebody does something wrong, there must be a consequence that that person has to deal with. So that is the way we will go," Groenewald said. The new minister added that South Africans should understand that a sufficient budget was needed to fight and prevent crime effectively. "I say it is a criminal justice problem, including the police, the justice department and correctional services. The effect of crime on the economy is enormous, so it must be addressed. We must improve it if people say that too much money is being given to those departments," he said. "There should be more money, not because I'm the minister for correctional services, but because we must ensure effective prevention and combatting of crime. Then foreign investors will come to South Africa; we must address the crime issue."