John Hlophe has called the prosecution of EFF secretary-general Marshall Dlamini for assault with the intent to do grievous bodily harm an "abuse of state resources". Dlamini was sentenced to 18 months in prison, wholly suspended for five years, for slapping a police officer in Parliament. ANC MP Cameron Dugmore said that those undermining the integrity of the courts should be called out. MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe, the first judge to be removed from office in democratic South Africa, has called the successful prosecution of EFF secretary-general Marshall Dlamini for assault with the intent to do grievous bodily harm (GBH) an "abuse of state resources". Hlophe participated in the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development's budget vote debate on Wednesday. Across the board, MPs were concerned about a plethora of challenges the department faces, including corruption in the Master's Office and the state of court buildings against the backdrop of what African Christian Democratic Party MP Steve Swart called a "staggering" R5 billion budget over the medium-term expenditure framework. WATCH | 'What I did that day, I can do it again': EFF's Marshall Dlamini sentenced for slapping cop Hlophe, the former judge president of the Western Cape, zoomed in on the challenges the lower courts face and then turned to the Dlamini matter. "The resources are limited and one would expect the prosecution authority to use those resources wisely. Wisely, not widely," he said. "We've seen instances, and I prefer not to mention anyone, where the prosecutors have charged accused for what appears to be clearly a common assault case. You'll find that the accused is charged in the regional court, right? For common assault! "You ask yourself, who is sought to be pleased by the prosecutors? I prefer not to mention any name, [but] it was a high-profile person from one of the political parties. "The charges against him, he was convicted of assault GBH. In my view, that conviction cannot stand. It should have been common assault. It was an open clap, not even a fist. "So, in my view, that trial should never have taken place in the regional court. It was an abuse of state resources to teach him a lesson. It was clearly an abuse of state resources." EFF regional secretary Banzi Dambuza greets the party's secretary-general Marshall Dlamini outside court. (Jenni Evans/News24) News24 While Hlophe was at pains not to mention any names, he was clearly referring to the Dlamini matter. Dlamini, a senior EFF member, was prosecuted in the Cape Town Magistrate's Court for slapping a police officer with an open hand. The incident occurred after the 2019 State of the Nation Address, when Dlamini struck Warrant Officer Johan Carstens after he and another police officer asked the EFF members to wait in the National Assembly's lobby while President Cyril Ramaphosa and his entourage left the premises. The EFF claimed there was a right-wing plot to assassinate their leader, Julius Malema, which prompted Dlamini's slap. The court rejected this. Last month, Magistrate Nasha Banwari sentenced Dlamini to 18 months in prison, wholly suspended for five years. Dlamini will not see the inside of a cell unless he is again convicted of assault GBH within the suspension period. Anwari also sentenced Dlamini to three months in prison or a fine of R6 000 for malicious damage to Carstens' glasses, which Dlamini broke on the bridge of his nose, leaving a cut. The EFF said it would appeal the sentence. Dlamini remains an MP. Last week, during the debate on the Office of the Chief Justice's budget, Hlophe claimed, without providing any substantiation, that "malicious prosecutions" were on the rise. READ | 'Cruel irony': Hlophe's election to JSC to be challenged on grounds of rationality and rule of law MK Party leader Jacob Zuma is being prosecuted for Arms Deal related corruption. It was Hlophe's interference in this matter which led to his removal from office. Back in 2008, he tried to sway two Constitutional Court judges to rule in Zuma's favour. After much legal wrangling, the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) found Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct in 2021. After some more litigation, the National Assembly voted overwhelmingly that Hlophe should be removed from the Bench in February this year. MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe will represent the National Assembly on the Judicial Service Commission. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 Two weeks ago, the National Assembly accepted Hlophe as one of its six delegates to the JSC. One of Hlophe's final rulings also involved a politically connected person, former ANC MP Bongani Bongo. Hlophe acquitted Bongo on corruption charges for his attempt to stop a parliamentary inquiry into state capture at Eskom. However, the Supreme Court of Appeal found that Hlophe had made several mistakes in law, overturned his decision and ordered a retrial. Bongo was among the MPs who voted in favour of Hlophe's removal. READ | 'Mistakes of law': SCA overturns Hlophe's acquittal of Bongani Bongo, orders retrial During his contribution to the debate, ANC MP Cameron Dugmore lauded the "struggle lawyers" and jurists who've contributed to South Africa's constitutional democracy post-1994. Dugmore said: At the same time, we should not shy away from calling out all those, officers of the court included, who, by their conduct, undermine the integrity of our courts. If those charged with dispensing justice or upholding the rule of law fail to do so, there must be consequences. He also questioned the MK Party's litigation strategy. "One of the ways in which our justice system gets blocked up is by frivolous applications, and I'm not sure who is advising the uMkhonto weSizwe Party but to go, first of all, to the Electoral Court without any evidence, I believe is wasting the time of the court. And then, secondly, to then say that the SABC should not use the words government of national unity … Is it advocate Hlophe, or is Judge Hlophe, that is advising them?" He was referring to a recent high court application by the MK Party, in which it alleges that the SABC is biased by using the term "government of national unity" (GNU). ANC MP Oscar Mathafa said he wanted to address the "persistent attacks on the GNU". "The baseless attacks must be construed as an attack, not on the formation of the government that the ANC so wisely proposed, but against the founding principles of the GNU, which are respect for the Constitution, the Bill of Rights in its entirety…" At this point, he was interrupted by MK Party MP Sibonelo Nomvalo. "The principles also include the rule of law, non-racialism, non-sexism, social justice, redress and equity as well as the alleviation of poverty," Mathafa continued. "For me, House chair, any person against such a novel, principled GNU is a danger to democracy and prosperity of a modern society."