MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe will represent the National Assembly on the Judicial Service Commission. It was a JSC finding of gross misconduct that led to his removal as a judge. The DA and FF Plus – both members of the GNU – broke ranks and objected to Hlophe's delegation. The first judge to be removed in a democratic South Africa will now sit on the body appointing and disciplining judges. This is the same body that found John Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct, and which led to his removal. On Tuesday morning, the National Assembly elected its delegates for the Judicial Service Commission. The first contentious vote in the National Assembly since the formation of a government of national unity (GNU) also showed that the parties in this formation would not always vote together, as the DA and FF Plus broke ranks. Hlophe, who was removed after a historic vote by the National Assembly, is now the parliamentary leader of corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party, and was their nominee for the JSC delegation. Also representing the National Assembly on the JSC is EFF leader Julius Malema, who was often at the centre of controversies at the JSC during the previous term. The DA nominated Glynnis Breytenbach, a former senior prosecutor who, like Malema, has served on the JSC since 2014. The ANC nominated MPs Molapi Soviet Lekganyane and Fasiha Hassan, who is a lawyer. ActionSA nominated its parliamentary leader, Athol Trollip, who is an experienced legislator. The National Assembly elected its delegates for the Judicial Service Commission on Tuesday morning. (Graphic by: Sharlene Rood/News24) News24 Last week, after it became known that Hlophe would be the MKP's nominee, a group of civil society organisations wrote to National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza. Freedom Under Law (FUL) - which played a key role in Hlophe's eventual impeachment - the Council for the Advancement of the South African Constitution (Casac), Judges Matter, the Helen Suzman Foundation (HSF), Defend our Democracy, and the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation wrote to Didiza, saying they were "deeply concerned" about Hlophe's name appearing on the order paper. "The JSC plays a central role in the appointment of judges. Bearing in mind the extensive powers vested in the judiciary under the Constitution, it is no exaggeration to say that the work of the JSC is therefore crucial to the rule of law and constitutional democracy in South Africa," reads the letter. They argued that designating someone to the JSC who was found guilty of gross misconduct by that same body would be completely inappropriate, irrational and susceptible to legal challenge. READ | Parliament warned against sending Hlophe to JSC, which found him guilty of gross misconduct Nonetheless, the National Assembly proceeded with the election, with the objections of the DA, FF Plus and ACDP noted. DA chief whip George Michalakis said that while there was a long-standing practice that when a position was allocated to a party for representation, it was tconsidered the prerogative of that party to decide who will represent it, and that as long as an individual is deemed to be fit and proper to serve in the National Assembly, they were considered fit and proper to represent the National Assembly on other forums. "However, in the current context, there are two reasons why this process should not continue today," he said. "The first is that it is a matter of public record that Dr Hlophe lost the status as a judge of the High Court of South Africa as a consequence of the finding of gross misconduct by the Judicial Services Commission. "The decision to be taken today is first, not merely a political decision but the exercise of a public power aimed at contributing to the establishment of the very same Judicial Services Commission in the circumstances." Michalakis added that Parliament was required to exercise this power in a rational manner. "The second reason why Parliament should not elect Dr Hlophe is to be found in the constitutional obligation which we as members of the National Assembly enjoy to assist and protect the Judiciary in order to ensure its independence, impartiality, dignity and effectiveness," he said. MKP chief whip Sihle Ngubane said: "It is also important to highlight that the numerical and proportional strength of parties such as the MKP and the resultant privileges are coming from that are constitutionally protected." Ngubane noted that Hlophe was Cambridge-educated. He added that the important thing was that politicians were involved in the JSC to amplify the voice of the electorate, and that with his legal qualifications and judicial experience, Hlophe was the right fit. ANALYSIS | Why the presence of Hlophe, Mkhwebane in Parliament makes case for electoral reform EFF deputy president Floyd Shivambu expressed the party's support for Hlophe's appointment. As a matter of principle, anyone eligible to become a member of the National Assembly in terms of the Constitution can be delegated to fulfil parliamentary functions. "There are so many less than capable members of the Democratic Alliance, some of which are serving in the executive now, who do not have any form of qualification or direction. We have not yet exposed their incapacity," Shivambu said. "It's just a group of white illiterates, semi-illiterates that are presiding over government because a certain section of society has given you that responsibility. We respect that. So, let's respect the fact that a certain number of people in South Africa have voted for uMkhonto weSizwe Party, and have designated Dr John Hlophe to become a Member of Parliament." The EFF never supported Hlophe's removal as judge in the first place. FF Plus MP Wouter Wessels said it was true that the Constitution did not prescribe who Parliament sent to the JSC. However, it should be a rational decision. Wessels said there would be an apparent conflict of interest. He added that there was a lacuna in the Constitution, because a person shouldn't be able be impeached by the House, and then become a member of the same House. ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli said they respected the DA's concerns and objections around Hlophe, but that when the Constitution was silent on a matter, Parliamentary principles must be adhered to. "One of those principles is that parties must be permitted to second their own chosen members to specific portfolio committees. That's one of the principles that we've established. It doesn't mean that there will not be a time where we can deal with that if there is a concern emanating from one of the parties who are representing the other party," he said. "The parties have been engaging one another about what we understand as members of the Seventh Parliament. We have agreed that until rules are amended otherwise, we are going to have to stay with the current convention and the rules of the national Parliament. "Our view is that notwithstanding the concern that has been raised by the DA on the short-term matter, we want to suggest that the House should not take a position unless it has clarified its own rules, whether there is lacuna or other rules." In May 2008, justices of the Constitutional Court laid a complaint with the JSC over Hlophe's attempt to convince Justices Chris Jafta and Bess Nkabinde to rule in Zuma's favour to overturn warrants used to seize 93 000 pages of corruption trial evidence against him. Jafta said Hlophe had told him: "Sesithembele kinina [we pin our hopes on you]." After much further legal wrangling, it eventually culminated in the JSC finding Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct in August 2021. The JSC, in a majority ruling, found he had seriously threatened and interfered with the independence, impartiality, dignity and effectiveness of the Constitutional Court. It ruled that Hlophe improperly attempted to influence Nkabinde and Jafta to violate their oaths of office. After further litigation, Parliament eventually dealt with the matter. In February, 305 MPs voted for Hlophe's removal. Despite now being an MP, Hlophe continues his litigation against Parliament over the impeachment process. READ | Karyn Maughan: Julius Malema despises judges – so why is he empowered to appoint them? Malema and the EFF often accuse judges of being "captured", especially those that rule against them, without providing evidence. As a JSC commissioner, he asked Judge Elias Matojane, a judge in the Gauteng High Court in Johannesburg at the time, about his ruling against the EFF in the defamation case brought against it by former finance minister Trevor Manuel. Matojane's ruling was almost entirely upheld by the SCA. It was this incident that led to the Ethics Committee's finding against Malema that he should not have used the JSC as a "platform for his personal interests". He also levelled unsubstantiated allegations of sexual harassment against Gauteng Judge President Dunstan Mlambo during a JSC interview. This was expunged from the record. In JSC discussions last year, Malema also made unsubstantiated accusations of racism against Judge David Unterhalter.