President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed Pieter Groenewald as the minister of correctional services on Sunday night. Groenewald replaced Ronald Lamola, who served in the portfolio since 2019. His appointment has sparked widespread expectations and hopes among prisoners and unions. Facing a daunting array of systemic issues, newly appointed Minister of Correctional Services Pieter Groenewald steps into a role burdened with severe challenges. These include severe overcrowding, significant staff shortages, inadequate provisions for LGBTQI+ and mentally ill people, and rampant sexual assault within facilities. In a significant reshuffle within the government's ranks on Sunday night, President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed Groenewald as the new political head of the ministry. Groenewald replaced Ronald Lamola, who served in the portfolio since 2019. The FF Plus leader, a B.luris graduate from North West University, is a seasoned politician who has been an MP since 1989. However, Groenewald's appointment comes at a time when the department is navigating through complex challenges. The challenges and what unions want Reacting to his appointment, the Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (Popcru) said it had raised serious concerns over the past years about the department's severe overcrowding and staffing shortages. Popcru spokesperson Richard Mamabolo said the current staff count stands at 38 000, a decrease from 40 000 in 2009, with only 27 000 officials actively working in correctional centres. "It demands the employment of more custodial officers. On various occasions we have expressed that DCS must not renew the contracts of private prisons in the country, and should develop a clear plan that will include admitted trade unions within the department on the winding-up process," Mamabolo said. READ | 'At the mercy of prisoners': Popcru complains about dangerous conditions for Eastern Cape guards To address these systemic issues, the union proposed several measures to ensure that the DCS can fulfil its constitutional mandate for rehabilitation. These include revising the promotion policy and shift systems, making correctional centres self-sufficient, constructing new facilities in rural areas, hiring more personnel, and refurbishing dilapidated infrastructure. Prisoners speak out Groenewald's appointment from a different political party has sparked discussion and hope among the prison population, particularly those serving long-term sentences. "At the end of the day, we needed something new with a lot of things that have affected us," a prisoner serving life at a facility in Limpopo said. The prisoner, who spoke anonymously, said that he believed Groenewald would address the long-standing issues within the prison system that previous administrations had overlooked. "I believe that this person is bringing new things and bringing new hope to us so that when we get outside, we need to do something that will discourage other people from doing what we have done," he said. The prisoner also highlighted the lack of effective rehabilitation programmes, which were crucial for reintegration into society. He said they needed more relevant skills training, sporting codes and educational opportunities. He added: Remember, we are here [in prison] because we have done wrong and need to be corrected. Sports play a huge role in rehabilitation, and we need to have skills that will be able to assist us in order for us to be better people. He added that many of the programmes currently offered in prisons were outdated and not applicable outside the prison environment. "They give you the skills that you must do for 30 days, but you are only going to use them to bypass a parole board. You can't even use them [skills] when you go outside. So, we need skills that will benefit us even after our release," he said. He added: "For those who are serving life sentences, they must make education compulsory. At least when you are released, you must at least have matric, if possible." An inmate from Grootvlei prison in Bloemfontein told News24 that he was "at peace" about Groenewald's appointment. "We believe that things would be much easier and there will be lots of changes and progress in this department. Everything has lapsed a long time ago. We were almost at a point where we never thought rehabilitation existed and prison was a dump site," the prisoner said. READ | 'Walking into fire': Key infrastructure job for new Cabinet blood Dean Macpherson The inmate, who is also serving life behind bars, said he was looking forward to serving his sentence "in a dignified manner" and being considered for parole when qualified. "We trust that the case management committee of all the departments will start working fairly and not by [doing] favours for certain people, especially here at Grootvlei prison and its rotten management." Call us to you SA Prisoners Organisation for Human Rights (SAPOHR) president Golden Miles Bhudu welcomed Groenewald's appointment but said they would only be "impressed" if invited to a meeting. "That is where we are going to test his skill and his loyalty in this department and his loyalty in the country. "I cannot remember when last I, on behalf of this organisation, met a minister and a deputy minister, sitting around a table and sharing notes with them, negotiating and strategising," Bhudu said. Bhudu said the organisation aimed to present Groenewald with a "recognition and precision" agreement. This document outlines the organisation's desire for formal recognition and a precise framework for cooperation with the department. "The commissioners, who we are told are supposed to be public servants and not have a political agenda, none of them ever wanted to let us talk about recognising us." Bhudu expressed hope that Groenewald, who he described as a wise and straightforward Afrikaner, would fulfil the correctional services mandate to train, educate, and skill inmates. "The people in prison have never been educated, trained and skilled. All has fallen on deaf ears."