On Friday, IFP President Velenkosini Hlabisa urged the DA and the ANC to conclude their GNU negotiations. During the press briefing, the IFP committed to continue talking to the National Freedom Party in KwaZulu-Natal. IFP MP Mkhuleko Hlengwa said there was no agreement with the NFP to co-govern at the local government level. The IFP in KwaZulu-Natal has moved to clarify that while its doors are open to negotiate with the National Freedom Party, no agreement to co-govern at a local government level has been reached. Addressing the media at the party's headquarters in Durban on Friday, IFP MP Mkhuleko Hlengwa said the party was committed to continuing to engage with its political partners in KwaZulu-Natal. "The commitment to engage remains firmly on the table, but as things stand, we must put it categorically that there is no agreement between the NFP and IFP on local government matters. "There is progress on these discussions, and the first point was that a seat on the provincial Cabinet was secured for the NFP and done so in good faith, without any expectations, other than that we view all of us in the PGU as equals in the formation of this Cabinet," explained Hlengwa. READ | 'No crisis, agreements must be reached on a win-win': IFP calls on DA, ANC to conclude GNU talks The clarification comes after the NFP president, Irvin Barnes, was set to take up a seat as a councillor at the IFP's stronghold, Zululand District Municipality, in what was a precursor move to a more senior position as a result of the government of national unity (GNU) talks. News24 reported on 26 June that Barnes was expected to be installed as mayor, replacing IFP leader and Zulu kingdom prime minister Thulasizwe Buthelezi, who has since been appointed as the new cooperative governance and traditional affairs MEC in a GNU deal between the IFP, ANC, and the DA. However, this did not happen. Instead, IFP candidate Michael Khumalo - a councillor since 1995 - was elected mayor on Thursday. It was also speculated that the NFP would also take over the administration of the troubled uThukela District Municipality, which is led by the IFP with support from the DA. READ | COALITION NATION: NFP president looks set to be appointed Zululand mayor as part of GNU agreement After Khumalo's election, the NFP apparently scheduled urgent meetings with the IFP to raise its concerns about what transpired during the week. Hlengwa explained that when the provincial discussions were held, the matter of statement of proportionality in the executive was discussed. "As the IFP and other partners felt that if you applied that formula to KwaZulu-Natal, it would have effectively meant that the NFP would have been left out of the provincial Cabinet. "It was in the collective thinking of the negotiating teams across the parties that not qualifying on the basis of proportionality does not mean that they should be closed out. Hence, the NFP's Honourable (Mbali) Shinga in the Legislature, is currently now the MEC for social development in KwaZulu-Natal," he said. READ | New KZN government finally introduces Section 154 team in eThekwini after ANC resisted intervention IFP President Velenkosini Hlabisa said the IFP noted the NFP's concerns but would not engage in negotiations through the media. "The IFP, ANC, DA, and the NFP have a platform at a provincial level in KwaZulu-Natal where we engage each other. The meeting that discussed our arrangement in KwaZulu-Natal agreed on the formation of the government of provincial unity in KwaZulu-Natal. "Of course, there were issues that were raised but which were not made as points of agreement. The best way we will deal with the issue of the NFP is to engage directly with the leadership of the NFP." Furthermore, Hlabisa said it was common knowledge that the NFP in the Zululand District held the majority of councillor seats. Adding: "The principle is that as we hold the majority of councillors, really, we cannot exchange the will of the people and give it to any other political party, but we are open to engaging with the NFP and seeing how we can find common ground to address their concerns. "We are aware that they also indicated the issue of uThukela. The IFP is governing in Inkosi Langalibalele and Alfred Duma, and it will not go down well with the voters if we exchange their will for whatever reason that we can explain." READ | COALITION NATION: 'Take it or leave it': Ramaphosa presents final offers to GNU partners Hlabisa said: "The best thing that the IFP feels must be done is to engage the NFP in a proper platform where the four political parties are engaged so that we take our municipalities, province and country forward." He said engagements to find common ground with the NFP would continue. "It is in the IFP's nature to mediate where there is disagreement, to overcome challenges, and to create consensus. We will play this role wherever we are asked to do so, for we believe in serving the greater good," added Hlabisa. The IFP also used the briefing to call on its government of national unity partners, the ANC and DA, to conclude their negotiations. Hlabisa said: "It is essential the president, as the Constitution allows him, be able to reach the stage of announcing the new Cabinet. The IFP is thus calling on the ANC, the DA, and any other party to conclude the outstanding issues between them without further delay." READ | COALITION NATION: No Cabinet yet as GNU talks falter, again The call came amid delays in the announcement of the Cabinet fuelled by disagreements between the ANC and the DA. Negotiations are now in their third week as parties struggle to find each other. While it is Ramaphosa's prerogative to announce who he wants in Cabinet positions, Hlabisa said he had full confidence in both Ramaphosa and DA leader John Steenhuisen, who met again on Friday afternoon. The two leaders met to mend relations after the ANC withdrew the post of trade and industry, which it had initially agreed to offer to the DA.