Former Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe looks set to serve on the JSC. In February, Hlophe was impeached by the National Assembly for gross misconduct, becoming the first judge to be impeached by Parliament. In May 2008, justices of the Constitutional Court laid a complaint with the JSC about Hlophe's attempt to convince Justices Chris Jafta and Bess Nkabinde to rule in Zuma's favour. The first judge to be removed in a democratic South Africa, former Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe, has been nominated to serve on the Judicial Service Commission (JSC). Should Hlophe be elected as one of the National Assembly's MPs to serve on the JSC, he will preside over the appointment of other top judges for the nation's courts. In February, he was impeached by the National Assembly for gross misconduct, becoming the first judge to be impeached by Parliament. Hlophe's name appears on parliamentary documents released on Tuesday as one of six candidates up for consideration to serve on the JSC. After his swearing in as MP, he told journalists that he would accept nomination to the JSC if his party wanted to deploy him there. READ | MK Party MPs: From disgraced judge who wants to 'Africanise' law, to Gupta-linked 'Weekend Special' At the time, the MK Party had not yet deployed its MPs to committees. In May 2008, justices of the Constitutional Court laid a complaint with the JSC about Hlophe's attempt to convince Justices Chris Jafta and Bess Nkabinde to rule in Zuma's favour by overturning warrants used to seize 93 000 pages of corruption trial evidence against him. Jafta said Hlophe had told him: "Sesithembele kinina (we pin our hopes on you)." After much further legal wrangling, it eventually culminated in the JSC finding Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct in August 2021. Bongani Bongo voted to remove John Hlophe. (Adrian de Kock/Netwerk24) Netwerk24 The JSC, in a majority ruling, found he had seriously threatened and interfered with the independence, impartiality, dignity and effectiveness of the Constitutional Court. It ruled that Hlophe had improperly attempted to influence Nkabinde and Jafta to violate their oaths of office. In February, 305 MPs voted for Hlophe's removal. All ANC MPs present voted for his removal, including now former ANC MP Bongani Bongo, who was controversially acquitted by Hlophe when he was accused of trying to corruptly collapse Parliament's inquiry into Eskom and other SOEs by attempting to bribe the evidence leader. EFF leader Julius Malema and the DA bigwig Glynnis Breytenbach return to the JSC. Both have previously served on the body. The ANC has proposed Molapi Soviet Lekganyane and Fasiha Hassan to serve on the commission. Both are newcomers to the National Assembly. The committee structures will be constituted in due course. Committees are deemed the engine of Parliament as they oversee and scrutinise the work of government by providing a platform for debate and ensuring accountability. #7thParliament #30YearsofDemocracy… pic.twitter.com/XUjtYdWkJm — Parliament of RSA (@ParliamentofRSA) July 1, 2024 ActionSA nominated its parliamentary leader Athol Trollip to serve on the JSC. Trollip is considered a veteran MP. Controversial former communications minister Faith Muthambi is making a comeback. She, along with the DA's Adrian Roos, MK Party's Sibonelo Nomvalo, and the EFF's Omphile Maotwe have been nominated to serve on the Magistrate's Commission. ANC veteran MP Cedric Frolick looks set to retain the powerful position of Chair of Chairs (the chairperson of all portfolio committee chairpersons). The two other House Chairpersons nominated are former North West premier Supra Mahumapelo and the IFP's Zandile Majozi. Several other MPs will also be considered for the Pan-African Parliament and the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum. The sitting starts at 14:00 on Tuesday.