The Ekurhuleni mayor has appointed Jongizizwe Dlabathi as the new MMC of Finance Dlabathi, who is also the chief whip in the council, takes over from the EFF's Nkululeko Dunga Dunga was fired in June. Jongizizwe Dlabathi has been appointed the City of Ekurhuleni's new finance MMC. Mayor Nkosindiphile Xhakaza announced the appointment on Saturday after he fired EFF Gauteng chairperson Nkululeko Dunga as the MMC last month due to an "unforeseen misalignment". In a statement, the mayor added that Dlabathi was perfect fit for the job. "Alderman Dlabathi brings strategic acumen and extensive expertise in local government practice to this role, having served as the whip of the council since 2016. Furthermore, he currently holds the position of provincial chairperson of the South African Local Government Association (Salga) in Gauteng," Xhakaza added. He said: I am confident that his appointment will significantly strengthen our institution's capacity, supporting our efforts to enhance financial sustainability and optimise revenue enhancement in the City. Moreover, this appointment will assist the City in addressing the regression from losing our clean audit opinion from the Auditor-General of South Africa. The ANC in Ekurhuleni welcomed the appointment of Dlabathi, who is also the party's coordinator in Ekurhuleni. "With his wealth of knowledge and experience in local government, we are optimistic that he will live up to the expectations as set by the executive mayor … amidst the current challenges faced by the portfolio," the ANC in the region said in a statement. READ | Panyaza Lesufi keeps door open for DA, but ANCYL cautions against 'silent coup' At the time Dunga was fired, Xhakaza said: "This decision is aimed at ensuring that we can effectively fast-track the completion and approval of the annual budget, a critical task for the continued development and growth of our city." Last month, EFF leader, Julius Malema, threatened that if Dunga was not reinstated, the EFF would pull out all of its MMCs in other Gauteng municipalities where it co-governs with the ANC. Despite Malema's threats, the EFF has not done so. The EFF has MMCs in the City of Johannesburg, Mogale City, and Ekurhuleni.