The Patriotic Alliance has set itself an ambitious goal of being among the top two political parties in the country by 2026. Deputy president Kenny Kunene says that after a "resounding" performance in the elections, the PA is no longer interested in forming coalitions with other parties. He said the PA joined the government of national unity and the government of provincial unity to create stability in the country. After a "resounding" performance at the May general elections, Patriotic Alliance deputy president, Kenny Kunene, says the party will now set its sights on being among the top two political parties in the 2026 local government elections. It will have to dramatically increase its share of the vote, since its support in the last local election in 2021 stood at 0.97%. It obtained 226 859 votes to the ANC's 10.6-million votes and the DA's 5-million votes. Speaking during a post-election media briefing in Johannesburg on Thursday, Kunene also explained why the PA joined the government of national unity (GNU), which has scored the party a ministerial Cabinet position. He said the PA outperformed most political parties in the May general elections to become the sixth-largest party in South Africa. However, this is no time to rest, he says, adding that the party has started a mass mobilisation campaign to take the party to greater heights. "We have grown from 6 000 to 7 000 votes in 2019 national and provincial elections to 330 000 votes. When we say we are the fastest-growing political party in the country, it is not just a statement, the numbers do not lie. Despite our position that we were robbed in the Western Cape, Northern Cape and Gauteng, we still outperformed many," claimed Kunene. "The Patriotic Alliance is the fastest-growing political party. The hand of God is on the Patriotic Alliance, and we are, unashamedly, a party that is God-fearing, and that is why we want to bring back God to schools," said Kunene. READ | PA urges McKenzie to launch forensic probe into Covid-19 funding controversy Party president, Gayton McKenzie, who was appointed to serve as minister of sports, arts, and culture in the GNU Cabinet, has taken up the party's seat in the National Assembly. Kunene said 80% of the PA's votes came from the coloured community. The party will now target other races as the local government elections loom. He said: "We are now going to be faced with the local government elections in about 18 months' time. That is not far. So our plan is very simple, we are not going to wait for the announcement of the date of the local government elections. We want to have ward councillor candidates in each and every ward in this country. Whether it is a ward that is run by white or Indian parties, we want candidates in every ward. "We want candidates in the villages, rural areas, cities and towns. It is our duty as patriots to go and make sure that we lobby community activists and patriots who love this country and their communities to stand under the Patriotic Alliance banner so that we can contest the local government elections in 2026, decisively." READ | New minister Gayton McKenzie's bold blueprint for revitalising SA sports and arts Kunene believes the party is on an upward trajectory. "In 2021, we were number seven, we have gone one step up and are now number six. We are not targeting number five. We are targeting number one or number two. The others have had a chance of numbers but they have played with that chance and power. Let us go and show them that when the voters have trusted you with the numbers and power, what do you do with that power. "In 2029, we will be targeting number one. That must be our attitude. Our attitude was to go into coalitions, and they have taken us to where we are now. We are no longer interested in coalitions going forward. We want to win municipalities outright," added Kunene. Explaining the reasons why the PA joined the GNU and the government of provincial unity (GPU), he said the ANC approached the party to join the bloc. He said the PA will use the platform to work hard and show South Africans what the party is capable of. Kunene said: Our attitude towards the GNU is that of stabilising the GNU for the benefit of South Africans. We must make sure that for these five years, we remain solid and we work together. I want to thank President Cyril Ramaphosa for having given our president an opportunity to run a department. "We want to appreciate Premier Panyaza Lesufi for having given us a department that is new (environment). Our attitude to the GPU is that of a stable Gauteng, which is the economic hub of South Africa and Africa. We cannot afford to have an unstable government." While the party is a GNU partner, he said the PA's stance on deporting illegal immigrants will not change. He said the party will also remain a self-funded organisation. Kunene also announced that several senior EFF leaders, including national organiser, Patrick Sindane, and anti-apartheid activist Kenny Motsamai, had officially joined the PA. Motsamai said: "I didn't join the PA for positions, and I was not called by anyone. We are having serious problems with other political parties like where I am coming from. We don't want people to bring their own people from outside without documentation." Sindane said he tendered his resignation from the EFF two weeks ago. He said: I have played my part. I have no obsession with positions. I left my PR seat in 2011 and joined the EFF; how can someone who is obsessed with positions leave a seat to go and fight for a seat that is nonexistent. The EFF has honoured me enough. I was an MPL through the EFF. What am I fighting for? What more do I want? I am here for what the PA stands for, and I think it speaks to my conscience. Kunene reminded members that the PA was not a political party that believed in positions, but in serving South Africans. "The problem in government and political parties is that when a person gets a position, they become the position and not themselves. We do not want that kind of leadership, we want a leadership that is humble and close to the ground."