The House of Traditional Leaders in KwaZulu-Natal has high hopes for the newly elected provincial leadership. The traditional leaders said they believe the KZN government is commitment to addressing long-standing issues plaguing traditional leaders in the province. KZN has about 2 229 izinduna (traditional leaders), the most in the country. The House of Traditional Leaders in KwaZulu-Natal is optimistic that the newly elected provincial leadership is committed to addressing long-standing issues over safety and overdue payments, that traditional leaders have been grappling with. After years of disputes with the government over their "rightful" entitlements, the House was anticipating a renewed era of collaboration and resolution, which would bring an end to the broader administrative challenges faced by the amakhosi and izinduna. Inkosi Sifiso Shinga, chairperson of the provincial House, said they hoped to have a constructive partnership with Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Thulasizwe Buthelezi. Shinga further underscored the importance of addressing critical issues affecting traditional leaders to avoid unnecessary "fights and conflicts". He said: We are hopeful that we will have a good working relationship with the new leadership. We also believe that it will make a difference in ensuring that all issues regarding traditional leaders are well taken care of. Shinga added that they had a renewed faith in the provincial government, since the majority of the political leaders in the new cabinet had a traditional leadership background. Shinga said that, as the traditional Zulu prime minister, Buthelezi would be able to pull the strings and silence disgruntled leaders. Over the years, the izinduna in the province have had issues regarding the back payments, while the department has raised concerns about lack of funding. KwaZulu-Natal has 2 229 izinduna, the most in the country. However, in the 2023/24 financial budget, then-premier Nomusa Dube-Ncube revealed that the National Treasury had allocated R631 million to settle the provincial governments' back pay of chiefs and headmen. Dube-Ncube said the first phase of more than R600 million in backdated payments was implemented at the end of April last year after a decade-long wait. READ | New KZN government finally introduces Section 154 team in eThekwini after ANC resisted intervention It was also announced that all qualifying izinduna, including the families of those who have since died, would benefit. Shinga said they believed that previous leadership efforts to address the issues regarding traditional leaders' payments, increases and backpay could have been faster. Nevertheless, he said their effort had made a difference and brought about stability and hope that the dignity of the amakhosi and izinduna was being restored and maintained. Shinga added that there were still a lot of unresolved issues that need urgent attention. He said: One of the other issues that must be resolved includes ensuring that all the traditional courts are working correctly. Having all the necessary equipment required at those courts will be good so that the leaders can do their duties accordingly. "We also have a serious issue of traditional leaders not being paid on time or sometimes taking months to receive their payment. We say that should be a thing of the past. Traditional leaders play a vital role in society in providing stability and peace; their role should also be taken seriously." Shinga said they would work closely with the political leadership to ensure that land issues were resolved and that a working relationship was maintained.