The City of Cape Town faced backlash from labour unions after publicly naming staff members dismissed for various offences. The municipal manager issued an internal letter to detail the actions against 113 staff members. The City, however, said the initiative was aimed at promoting ethical behaviour. Labour unions are angry after the City of Cape Town named and shamed staff members who were dismissed and found guilty of various offences. On Tuesday, the municipal manager, Lungelo Mbandazayo, sent out an internal letter to staff, detailing the measures taken against 113 staff members between January and June this year. In the letter, which News24 has seen, Mbandazayo said this was in the spirit of the City's values of "openness and accountability". "We will be publishing information related to the dismissals of all staff who have been dismissed on a monthly basis. The reason I believe this is important is so that staff members who are employed by the City can be made aware of the consequences of engaging in certain behaviours or taking certain undesirable actions. "I also wish to publish this information to all of you, so that you can feel confident enough in our organisation and its processes to come forward if you have information about a staff member engaging in behaviour and/or taking actions that go against the letter of the law and our City ethos (Local Government Code of Conduct and City Code of Ethics)," he told staff in an email. READ | Standard Bank slammed in toxic workplace case, ordered to pay fired employee R1.7m Mbandazayo also listed the reasons for the dismissal. Among the reasons were gross intoxication, dishonesty related to misconduct, gross negligence, assault, sexual harassment, fraud, gross insubordination, misuse of council property and theft, fraud and dishonesty. At the bottom of the email, Mbandazayo also released the names of 53 employees who had resigned or retired, facing disciplinary charges between January and June. Among the offences listed were abuse of sick leave, insolence, unprofessional conduct and the misuse of council vehicles. The South African Municipal Workers Union (Samwu) laid a complaint against Mbandazayo, accusing him of humiliating staff members. In the complaint, which was lodged on Tuesday, the union said: "In his newsletter, which is on the City's intranet for everyone to see, 113 names and surnames of dismissed employees are publicised, with reasons for dismissal, which crosses the confidentiality line." ALSO READ | Board pays R3.3m windfall to ‘incompetent’ CEO axed for misconduct, non-performance "Furthermore, 53 names and surnames of resigned or retired former employees are publicised, where the City manager overshadows their retirements/resignations with misconducts while they were never found guilty of anything." The union demanded a retraction by Wednesday midday. Samwu's regional organiser, Archie Hearne, told News24: "Our members alerted us to this communication. We then discussed it and registered our objection to the municipal manager's conduct. We believe this will hamper prospective staff's opportunity to find work. "We are seeking an urgent withdrawal of this letter, and this is an embarrassment," he said. Hearne added: This does not sit well with us. We believe the City must take action against the municipal manager. Cosatu's provincial secretary, Malvern de Bruyn, said they were disappointed. "This is not constitutionally right and we will take this matter forward. It's an infringement of people's rights. We can't have workers names being exposed like this, and their chances of finding work are essentially zero," he said. In a response to News24, the City said the letter sent to staff was a new initiative by Mbandazayo in an effort to live out three of the City's values - accountability, openness and caring. "Moreover, this initiative is aimed at promoting ethical behaviour among staff members. This list was distributed internally to staff only, and not for public consumption, as compared to the consequence of a media publication," it said. The City said it was not precluded by law from sharing such information internally, where it furthered the objectives of the municipality, as with any organisation.