The Teachers and Education Workers Union of SA (Tewusa) is a union that affiliates itself to former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party. It has been dealt a huge blow by the employment and labour department after its registrar rejected the organisation's application to exist as a labour formation. Despite the rejection, the "union" is still organising and fashions itself as a disruptor that will replace Sadtu. The registrar at the Department of Employment and Labour has dealt a huge blow to the organisers of a formation that affiliates itself with former President Jacob Zuma's MK Party (MKP) by rejecting its application to be recognised as a labour organisation in the education sector. The Teachers and Education Workers Union of South Africa (Tewusa) fashions itself as a competitor and disruptor to Sadtu. MKP spokesperson Nhlamulo Ndhlela ignored a question about the union's link to the party. Department of Employment and Labour spokesperson Petunia Lessing confirmed to News24 that an application for the registration of Tewusa was received by the registrar's office on 11 April 2024. It was rejected for registration on 20 May 2024. Lessing said: The application for registration failed to meet the requirements of the Labour Relations Act (LRA). Despite this, the union is still contacting and convincing unemployed teachers to fill in membership forms. An email and phone calls to numbers listed for Tewusa went unanswered. News24 contacted two of the administrators of the WhatsApp group used to recruit members. One of them, Max kaMageba, was asked if the union is registered and if it's still recruiting. Before hanging up, he curtly said: Why are you asking me that? I don't know anything. At one point, members of the Tewusa WhatsApp group argued with one another and distanced themselves from another MKP-affiliated Congress of the National Education Teachers Union (Conetu), which was reportedly founded and announced by former Sadtu provincial leader Mbuyiseni Mathonsi, who is now a leader in the MK Party. Earlier this year, Tewusa had organisers in several districts in Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga, screenshots of WhatsApp conversations in the union's group show. The Tewusa WhatsApp group is still active, with teachers sharing vacancies and MKP-related commentary, news and, quite often, voice notes circulating fake news about adversary political characters. Meanwhile, Sadtu spokesperson Nomusa Cembi said MKP politicians and aspiring trade unionists had been using her union's name to garner recognition. Speaking about Tewusa, Cembi said: We've just seen the union on social media. We're not threatened by their presence. We see that even when they post, they allude to us. It's like they're competing with us. She said she was astounded when she saw an MKP lawmaker attack Sadtu on social media. "Their fight isn't a political fight, but a fight against Sadtu. I don't understand it."