Khumbudzo Ntshavheni said there was a cost to the electoral outcome: a larger executive. Cyril Ramaphosa wanted to appoint a smaller executive, but had to accommodate every GNU party. The national executive consists of 77 members. The electorate has to accept responsibility for the outcome of the elections - and that cost is a large national executive, along with the associated expenses, said Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni on Thursday. She briefed the media after the swearing-in of President Cyril Ramaphosa's national executive on Wednesday. It comprises several members of political parties other than the ANC to form a government of national unity (GNU). There are 32 ministers, and Ramaphosa and his deputy, Paul Mashatile, which brings the Cabinet to 34 members strong. There are 43 deputy ministers, which means the national executive consists of 77 members. "Given the electoral outcome and the agreement to form a government of national unity, it was therefore no longer possible for the president to fulfil the undertaking he had previously made to reduce the number of the portfolios in the national executive," Ntshavheni said. "In simple terms, the size of the national executive is a result of our electoral outcome, with the need to be inclusive. In addition, the Constitution of the national executive had to be cognisant of other national interests, such as demographics, geographic spread, youth and gender representation." The national executive consists of 77 members. (GCIS/Supplied) After Ramaphosa's announcement of his executive on Sunday evening, questions were raised about the cost of the bloated Cabinet, given the perks which members of the executive enjoy. IN-DEPTH | For the people, or for the people in power? A quick look at executive's perks and quirks Ntshavheni did not want to speculate on the amount this executive would cost the national fiscus. "I can give you an example: in the Sixth Administration, it cost the government a billion rand per annum, if not slightly more, to move ministers, deputy ministers, DGs [directors-general] and everybody to attend portfolio committees and parliamentary work in Cape Town. "If government work has to be done, government work has to be done." She added: The electorate chose an outcome that landed us in a government of national unity. So the electorate will also have to bear and accept the responsibility for what they gave us. For us to make lemonade from the lemons, there is a cost to it, and that cost will have to be carried. It's a new normal. She added that Ramaphosa wanted a smaller executive, but he had to ensure that everyone was included. "Because it can't be a government of national unity, which is not inclusive of other parties, so, there is a cost to the electoral outcome." She said that, in the municipal elections in 2026 and in the national and provincial elections in 2029, South Africans would have the opportunity to decide "whether they want an outcome that does not have a clear outright winner, or whether they are happy with this outcome of collective leadership, with its advantages and disadvantages". "And the only disadvantage you have now stated is the costs."