Senzo Mchunu was appointed as the new police minister. Communities hope he will bring a fresh perspective to crime-fighting efforts. Experts say Mchunu's first job will be to restore trust in the police service. Community members hope the appointment of Senzo Mchunu will bring a fresh perspective to crime-fighting efforts. Crime experts, however, say he will have a tough job to restore trust in the police. President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday announced that Mchunu would take over the post of police minister, which was previously held by Bheki Cele. Crime expert Guy Lamb believes the appointment of Mchunu is a "really positive move". "Mchunu has extensive background and experience in governance, in a range of governance-related issues," said Lamb. "Listening to interviews and commentary from experts in the water sector, they had very positive things to say about him. It seems he is very much hands-on, and addressed problems in a direct and consultative way. Bringing that particular style of leadership to the police is really important." READ | School's out: Police and defence led by teachers in GNU Cabinet shake-up Lamb added that, under Cele's administration, the police minister had, at times, taken over the position of the national police commissioner. He hoped that the new appointment would result in less political interference with regard to police work. "Mchunu understands the whole-of-government approach, which is essential in helping the police to work better with other ministries and departments," he said. Lamb added that he hoped Mchunu would start his term by focusing on professionalising the police. Lamb said: We need to get South Africans to trust the police more. If the police are courteous and responsive, you will see trust increasing. This will result in more cooperation with the police. A senior researcher and policing expert at the Institute for Security Studies, Johan Burger, agreed that the police service had "lost legitimacy" in recent years. Burger hoped that Mchunu would improve confidence and trust in the police, and that he would grasp "the separation of political and operational responsibilities". "I would like to see the new minister devote his attention to the number of very authoritative reports on how the police service can be turned around," said Burger. "We have these reports, and they all recognised the weakness and made good recommendations. We need the minister to look at these reports and develop an implementation plan with the police service," he said. The chairperson of the national community policing forum (CPF), Fransina Lukas, said the appointment had been "a pleasant surprise". "Senzo Mchunu is not someone who talks a lot, but rather someone who's on the ground working. The expectation is that we will have less talk and more action. He will bring a fresh perspective on how to address crime issues," she said. ALSO READ | 'We are being allowed to reset': Hope and caution as bloated, reconfigured GNU Cabinet announced Lukas hoped that Mchunu would prioritise plans to address gang violence, especially in the Western Cape, as well as building relationships with community safety structures. An East London anti-crime activist, Amanda Timms, said she expected Mchunu to make funds available for the purchase of more police vans. "Many police stations are not resourced. More vehicles are needed to ensure effective crime-fighting. Small police stations across the Eastern Cape have a dire shortage of police vans, and this needs to be urgently addressed," said Timms. In a statement, the Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (Popcru) said it hoped the new minister would address the "continued killing of law enforcement officers in the country". Popcru added: This unfolding national crisis has the potential of threatening the country's peace and stability as the majority of these dedicated men and women are killed on duty while preventing, combating or solving a crime. "We reaffirm our call for the government to publicly declare war against cold-blooded criminals by amending current legislation to classify this barbaric act as treasonous and expect the newly appointed minister to push for legislative amendments in this regard." Popcru called for the new minister to address the police-to-population ratio and to review the police's salary structure. The chairperson of Manenberg's CPF, Vernon Visagie, said: "A new broom sweeps clean. And I just hope that this minister will come up with great plans and ideas on how to manage SAPS better than the previous minister." A resident of Stutterheim in the Eastern Cape, Babalwa Goroleki, said she needed Mchunu to focus on making sure police officers were able to perform their duties efficiently. On 16 June, Goroleki's two-year-old nephew was hanged to death, allegedly by her boyfriend and taxi driver, Siyanda Maguga, after cheating allegations between the couple. ALSO READ | Police unions want suspected cop killers not to be eligible for bail "We need police officials who are not corrupt and who will ensure that perpetrators of crime are arrested. Without the effective rule of law, our country is in big trouble. For the rule of law to take place, we need effective policing," said Goroleki. The spokesperson for Nyanga's CPF, Dumisani Qwebe, said the appointment had come as a shock. "We thought that we'd have someone who's going to be very vocal because that department needs someone who's going to be very vocal," he said. Qwebe added that he hoped Mchunu would "immediately kickstart his duties" by meeting with safety structures and communities to understand the "challenges on the ground". A resident of Qumbu, Nosipho Nozulu, said she wanted Mchunu to prioritise the protection of women and children. Nozulu said: Women are at the receiving end of gender-based violence. We are asking the new police minister to ensure that women and children receive greater attention when reporting cases of gender-based violence. On 29 April, Nozulu's relatives - Simcelile Nozulu, 17, and her 70-year-old grandmother, Noma-India - died in the Jokweni Village in Qumbu. They were stabbed to death, allegedly by Simcelile's knife-wielding boyfriend, Sihle Manciya, 26. Manciya, who is still in police custody, also allegedly injured Simcelile's mother, Xoliswa, and her sister, Asamkele, during the attack.