Ace Magashule's ex-PA, Moroadi Cholota, who was arrested in the US in April, was charged alongside him in the State's asbestos scam case. A US court found she could be extradited and ordered that she should remain behind bars until US Secretary of State Antony Blinken authorised her return to SA. In submissions to Blinken, her legal team argued that she would not receive a fair trial in South Africa. To avoid her extradition to South Africa to face corruption charges, former Free State premier Ace Magashule's ex-PA told US authorities that she would not receive a fair trial. Moroadi Cholota also held fast to her argument - which was rejected - that the charges against her were politically motivated. Last month, Maryland District Court Magistrate Judge Erin Aslan ordered Cholota remain behind bars while US Secretary of State Antony Blinken decides whether to authorise her extradition. Aslan found that "[t]he evidence before this court is sufficient to justify Ms Cholota's commitment for trial had the offences with which she is charged been committed in the United States". Initially, Cholota was considered to be a possible key witness for the State, which is attempting to prove that Magashule was embroiled in a corrupt R255-million asbestos tender scheme that allegedly saw five high-ranking Free State government officials receive R27 million in bribes from money meant to fund the removal of harmful asbestos from the homes of the province's poorest residents. READ | Return of the personal assistant: How Ace Magashule's Stalingrad strategy came back to bite him According to court papers filed by Free State Director of Public Prosecutions Navilla Somaru, up until the State met with Cholota in the US in November 2021, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) "was of the view that Cholota was a State witness, which was in keeping with the impression she created". But when detectives interviewed Cholota in the US, "she made an about-turn and failed to cooperate with the State", Somaru said. It was then that the NPA decided to charge her as the 17th accused in the asbestos tender corruption case and apply for her extradition. The interaction with investigators forms the crux of Cholota's attempts to avoid standing trial in South Africa. In submissions to Blinken, Cholota's legal team argued that Cholota was charged with multiple counts of fraud, corruption and money laundering "primarily due to her refusal in questioning as a State witness, to attribute specific actions to Mr Ace Magashule, and not because she was implicated or had committed those crimes". "Indeed, this is further compounded by the fact that up until her questioning by investigators, she had not been named or implicated in any of the multitude of reports and investigations by various state institutions, such as the Special Investigations Unit, the Auditor-General, the Public Protector, and the state capture commission report itself. It is even further compounded by the fact that Ms Cholota was never charged together with the now-co-accused in the criminal matter up until the point of her questioning as a witness. "Ms Cholota was charged with corruption, money laundering and fraud purely as retaliation and in a bid to inflict punishment on her for her failure to 'co-operate'." READ | Extradition bid for Magashule's PA reveals she 'worked to nail down bribes' Cholota further charged that it was a violation of her human rights and that it constituted torture. "We wholeheartedly submit that the above is a clear violation of human rights and international law. It is clear and unambiguous evidence of investigating officers unlawfully threatening and intimidating a State witness into providing false evidence/testimony against a then-politically prolific individual, investigating officers and prosecutors colluding amongst themselves as to the punishment that would be meted out to Ms Cholota if she failed to co-operate with them and then subjecting her to the cruellest and most inhumane treatment and punishment when she fails to co-operate with them in the manner they desired, namely: charging her with the serious crimes of multiple counts of fraud, corruption and money laundering." The legal team further stated: It is our submission that on any objective consideration of what had been stated above in these submissions and the accompanying affidavits it becomes clear that there is no fairness to speak of in relation to the charges against Ms Cholota, for which extradition is now sought from the United States of America. "We further submit, that it also becomes clear that the charges against Ms Cholota for fraud, corruption and money laundering, were very much politically motivated. This much was clear to Ms Cholota on the day of her questioning, and she stated as such. It was her political opinion that her line of questioning at the hands of the investigators, the threats and intimidation levelled against her were so done owing to political motives and considerations on the part of the investigating officers and the National Prosecuting Authority. "It therefore cannot be said that the trial against Ms Cholota is fair either. It is unlawful and unconstitutional." In May, Cholota asked the Constitutional Court for direct and urgent access to challenge the request for her extradition from the US. In response to that application, Hawks investigator Benjamin Calitz disputed Cholota's sworn evidence on her questioning. According to Calitz's account of that questioning, which occurred over two days and ended in Magashule's ex-PA being informed she was now a suspect, "Ms Cholota was never detained, threatened, or denied her constitutional rights, nor was she subjected to 'apartheid-era tactics', by Brigadier Gerber or I, during the course of our interviews with her on 22 and 23 September 2021". "In fact, she was allowed to travel on her own accord, she met with her boyfriend, we accommodated her class schedule, and even fetched her and dropped her off where she was required to be. "She happily asked Brigadier Gerber to take photos of her with the ambassador, which he obliged," he added. Ace Magashule’s former PA Moroadi Cholota (right) poses with SA Embassy staff after she claims she was subjected to apartheid-style questioning by asbestos scam investigators. (Supplied) Calitz contended Cholota's allegations that her constitutional rights had been breached during that questioning process were "concocted in an effort to avoid her return to South Africa to face the charges set out against her in the indictment in the asbestos project matter". Photos of a smiling Cholota with embassy staff was also submitted. READ | Smiling photo is NPA's smoking gun after Ace's ex-PA alleges 'apartheid-era' intimidation It is the State's case that Magashule and Cholota were both embroiled in the allegedly corrupt asbestos tender scheme, under which businessman Edwin Sodi's Gauteng-based engineering consultancy firm, Blackhead Consulting, and murdered businessman Igo Mpambani's company, Diamond Hill Trading 71, scored a R255-million contract in 2014 for the "audit and assessment of asbestos housing units". Ace Magashule (L), and businessman Edwin Sodi (R), inside the Free State High Court in Bloemfontein. (Lihlumelo Toyana/AFP) AFP Instead of the affected houses being safely rid of asbestos at a reasonable price, the State said Sodi and over a dozen of his co-accused essentially embarked on a "rent-seeking" scheme that ultimately resulted in only R21 million worth of work being done. Furthermore, according to documents submitted in support of the NPA's successful efforts to seek the certification of Cholota's extradition, she had been studying in the US because of a R1.2-million Free State government bursary she did not, in fact, qualify for.