The National Assembly's portfolio committees will elect their chairpersons on Tuesday. In a significant break from the past, they will not all be from the ANC. The House will also elect its delegates to the Judicial Service Commission. In a significant break from the past, one party will not dominate the ranks of chairpersons of parliamentary committees. After the formation of a government of national unity (GNU), following the ANC's loss of its outright majority, the portfolio committee chairpersons expected to be elected on Tuesday will come from more than one party. This could lead to a major change in how Parliament operates. However, it appeared that, by Monday evening, what this new configuration would look like had not been finalised. Last week, the National Assembly Rules Committee established 30 portfolio committees to shadow the 30 Cabinet portfolios of the seventh administration that President Cyril Ramaphosa announced last Sunday. Each committee will have 11 members – the ANC will have four seats, the DA and MK Party will get two seats each, the EFF one and the other parties will be allocated the remaining two seats. While the National Assembly's plenary sittings are probably what pops into the minds of most people when they hear the word "Parliament", most of the legislature's work actually gets done in the committees – portfolio committees for the National Assembly and select committees for the National Council of Provinces. Furthermore, there are also standing committees – like the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) and the Standing Committee on Finance – in the National Assembly, and joint committees, like the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and Joint Standing Committee on Defence, which consist of members from both Houses. "Committees are the engine rooms of Parliament and, in terms of the rules, their role includes dealing with oversight, public participation, bills and other matters falling within its portfolio as referred to in terms of the Constitution, legislation, the Joint Rules, or by resolution of the Assembly," Parliament said in a statement last week. As such, committee chairpersons are influential MPs – they exert control over a committee's agendas and determine how much input opposition MPs have in its proceedings. In past Parliaments, all committee chairpersons, bar the chairperson of Scopa, have been ANC members. READ | Mpumelelo Mkhabela: Why it would be wrong to block Hlophe from serving on the JSC The Zondo Commission's report, released in June 2022, found that Parliament "failed to use the oversight and accountability measures at its disposal" and recommended that Parliament consider whether more opposition MPs could be appointed as committee chairpersons. When the Rules Committee finally met to deal with the Zondo recommendations in April 2023, this recommendation was shot down, with ANC MP Hope Papo saying: "We don't have a coalition government at national level. That's a non-starter, that recommendation." Former ANC MP Qubudile Dyantyi said: "The commission cannot dictate to the legislature. Us having gone through elections, being voted in, the strength of each party is being recognised in the Constitution." He said there must never be a suggestion to "dilute" that. ANC MP Doris Dlakude said: "We are not in a coalition government. It's up to political parties what they want to do with their power." But, since then, the electorate has spoken and, with the formation of a GNU, it is expected that committee chairpersons will not all come from the ANC. ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli acknowledged as much when he said in a statement on Thursday: In furtherance of our mandate to ensure scrutiny and exercise oversight over the work of government, the ANC, led by the chief whip will, as a matter of urgency, engage parties participating in the government of national unity to appoint the chairpersons and whips of the parliamentary oversight committees as approved by the Rules Committee. However, by Monday, it was unclear how the committee chairpersons positions would be shared among the GNU parties. Scopa is a key watchdog committee that oversees the financial statements and audits of all departments, constitutional institutions and other public bodies when those statements are submitted to Parliament. While it is not required by the National Assembly's rules, Scopa's chairperson is usually from an opposition party. In the fifth Parliament, this was the APC's Themba Godi - and, in the sixth, it was the IFP's Mkhuleko Hlengwa, who is now deputy transport minister. ActionSA, which does not form part of the GNU, last week indicated its willingness to take up the position of Scopa chair, proposing its parliamentary leader Athol Trollip for the position. "ActionSA has availed itself to chair the Standing Committees on Public Accounts in light of the established convention that this role be led by a party in the opposition space. This has been done in the context of ActionSA as an opposition party, with no agreement with the grand coalition and on the understanding that ActionSA will be tough opposition," said the party's national chairperson, Michael Beaumont, in a statement. "The nature of the role of a Scopa chairperson is vital, especially in the context of this grand coalition. Strong government needs a counter-balancing force in opposition that uses the considerable powers afforded to a Scopa chairperson to hold government to account. Government officials, political office bearers and vendors to the state can be subpoenaed to appear before Scopa to account." He added: It is evident that this new grand coalition needs to be held accountable by a strong, rational opposition. With the largest and most expensive Cabinet in our country's history already in place, and real concerns of political brinkmanship already on display by parties in this government, strong opposition has never been more important. Before the portfolio committees meet at 12:00, the National Assembly will have a sitting to elect House chairpersons. This was on the order paper for last week, but the motion was withdrawn. ANC MPs Cedric Frolick and Supra Mahumapelo were nominated, as was the IFP's Zandile Majozi. However, as the motion was withdrawn for further consultations among parties, there is a possibility that different MPs could be nominated. Frolick was the influential House chairperson in charge of committees or chair of chairs in the previous two Parliaments. The House will also elect its delegates to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Parliamentary Forum. The election of the delegates to the JSC could prove controversial, as the MK Party nominated the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, John Hlophe, its parliamentary leader, to serve on the very same body that found him guilty of gross misconduct, which led to his removal. Meanwhile, Ramaphosa has made key appointments constituting the link between the legislative and executive branches of government. He appointed Deputy President Paul Mashatile as leader of government business, and Gerhard Koornhof as his parliamentary councillor, according to Parliament's announcements, tablings and committees. Both served in these positions in the previous administration. After the election of their chairpersons, the committees will be briefed by the departments they oversee on their budgets. The budget vote debates will start on Wednesday.