Two impeached former officials, John Hlophe and Busisiwe Mkhwebane, are now overseeing the judiciary as MPs for the MK Party and EFF, respectively. Hlophe, the first judge to be removed, claimed "malicious prosecutions" were on the rise in South Africa. Mkhwebane, who used millions of the Public Protectors' funds to litigate, more often than not unsuccessfully, claimed "litigation is for the wealthy". The first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe, says "malicious prosecutions" are on the rise in South Africa. In February, the National Assembly voted in favour of Hlophe's removal from the bench, after the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) found him guilty of gross misconduct over his attempts to sway two Constitutional Court judges to rule in his now-party leader Jacob Zuma's favour in his long-running arms deal corruption case back in 2008. On Thursday, he was participating in the debate on the Office of the Chief Justice (OCJ) - the office to ensure the judiciary's independence - in a mini-plenary of the National Assembly. A general concern among MPs - including long-serving members of the Portfolio Committee on Justice, the DA's Glynnis Breytenbach, the ACDP's Steve Swart and the committee's new chairperson, the ANC's Xola Nqola - was budget cuts to the OCJ. Hlophe shared this concern. "The courts must do more work with less," he said. "The problem with that, in the case of High Courts, we all know that there is a huge backlog." Hlophe added these backlogs resulted from a wide range of factors, including load shedding. "Cases of malicious prosecution is on the rise. I'm not talking about wrongful arrests; I'm talking about malicious prosecutions. Those cases are on the rise, and they impact on the budget of this department," he said. While he did not elaborate or gave examples of these "malicious prosecutions", Hlophe added the solution was better training for prosecutors. Zuma is now standing trial on those same corruption charges Hlophe attempted to scupper after more than a decade and a half of legal manoeuvring and Stalingrad tactics to evade trial. One of the last rulings Hlophe delivered as Western Cape judge president, the acquittal of former ANC MP Bongani Bongo on corruption charges for his attempt to stop a parliamentary inquiry into state capture at Eskom, was recently overturned after the Supreme Court of Appeal found Hlophe made several mistakes in law. The SCA ordered a retrial. READ | 'Mistakes of law': SCA overturns Hlophe’s acquittal of Bongani Bongo, orders retrial Hlophe is not the only impeached person now overseeing the judiciary. Shortly after the National Assembly voted to remove Busisiwe Mkhwebane as Public Protector due to incompetence and misconduct - largely based on a slew of damning court rulings against her - she joined the EFF and was promptly deployed to Parliament, and the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services (as it was in the sixth Parliament). The findings of the Section 194 Committee that recommended her removal to the National Assembly include: Advocate Mkhwebane committed misconduct in utilising PPSA resources to obtain legal advice and commencing litigation for personal gain and in doing so committed misconduct by failing intentionally to prevent fruitless and wasteful public expenditure in legal costs. Advocate Mkhwebane committed misconduct in the performance of her duties by failing in a grossly negligent manner to prevent fruitless and wasteful public expenditure in legal costs by litigating recklessly as demonstrated hereinabove and in the judgments relating to the matters in the motion. The Office of the Public Protector (PPSA) was left financially and reputationally devastated by her litigious and expensive term in office, during which she unlawfully received accommodation worth R3.7 million, spent R33.5 million of state funds on her futile impeachment defence and wiped out the Public Protector's legal budget with adverse costs orders. READ | Mkhwebane bemoans 'drastic reduction' in income as EFF MP, sues Public Protector for R10m Evidence before the Section 194 inquiry revealed the PPSA had spent a staggering R147 million defending her legally indefensible investigations - with almost no success. This included fees paid to Paul Ngobeni, who is not allowed to practice law in South Africa, for "legal opinions" and articles slamming judges who have ruled against her. Ngobeni has also penned articles in support of Hlophe. On Thursday, Mkhwebane said the OCJ was established to ensure the independence of the judiciary and access to justice, but "litigation is for the wealthy, and you'll often find that the poor is not recognised". She is currently litigating against the office she once led to obtain a R10 million gratuity. Mkhwebane also claimed Chief Justice Raymond Zondo's appointment was "viewed as political" and his "leadership is very much questionable". Like Breytenbach, she expressed concern over the state of dilapidation many court buildings are in. IFP MP Nhlanhla Hadebe thanked Zondo, whose term comes to an end next month, for his service as head of the judiciary. "Over the years, our judiciary has faced its fair share of public scrutiny and low levels of public trust. But public servants like Justice Zondo have worked tirelessly to address and restore public trust in or judicial system and courts." New Justice and Constitutional Development Minister Thembi Simelane (formerly Nkadimeng) said: "For our society to function properly, it is imperative that citizens feel protected by the law. "Superior courts are integral in upholding the Constitution of South Africa and the rule of law." She added the OCJ strengthened the fight against corruption, which was a government priority. She said: The judiciary is an important arm of the state, and it is critical for the success of our constitutional democracy. Simelane said the executive would do all it could through the OCJ to support the independence of the judiciary. She, too, thanked Zondo and recognised his deputy, Justice Mandisa Maya, who will take over the reins next month. Responding to the concerns about the budget cuts, she said the fiscus could never cover everything. "The budget cuts, yes, are a challenge, but there are creative ways in which to address the issues." On Tuesday, Hlophe was elected to the National Assembly's six-member delegation to the JSC.