President Cyril Ramaphosa announced his new government of national unity Cabinet on Sunday night, following two weeks of negotiations between 11 parties. There are several new names in the Cabinet, mainly from the DA, but also including the PA, PAC, UDM, IFP, FF Plus, and GOOD parties. News24 profiles the new deputy president and the ministers. After two weeks of negotiations between parties who had joined the government of national unity, President Cyril Ramaphosa finally announced his new Cabinet on Sunday night. There are several new names in the Cabinet, mainly from the DA, but also including the PA, PAC, UDM, IFP, FF Plus, and GOOD parties. It will be the largest government in 30 years, with 32 Cabinet ministers and 43 deputies. News24 takes a look at the profiles of the country's new deputy president and some of the new ministers: Paul Mashatile - deputy president Mashatile is the man to watch in the coming term. He was predictably reappointed as Ramaphosa's second-in-charge in Sunday night's reshuffle. Mashatile remains in pole position to replace Ramaphosa as president of the ANC when his term in the party concludes in 2027. Insiders close to Ramaphosa say he may do the noble thing and step aside to allow his successor to ascend to the position of head of state at that point to avoid causing division in the party and the state. This would mean that Mashatile - who seems to be the front-runner in the ANC race, could ascend to the country's top job sooner than anticipated. Deputy President Paul Mashatile, seen here with his wife Humile Mashatile at the Presidential Inauguration at Union Buildings, is tipped to be the likely replacement for President Cyril Ramaphosa. (Frennie Shivambu/Gallo Images) Gallo Images However, there are questions about his lavish lifestyle and whether he uses his political power to obtain material gain as detailed in News24 investigations. The DA, which is now part of the government, has laid charges against Mashatile based on these reports. Other challengers to Mashatile at the ANC's 2027 National Conference could come from current secretary-general Fikile Mbalula, who has earned praise from party insiders in the last month over his handling of negotiations for Ramaphosa's election, and over the formation of the government of national unity. Ronald Lamola - Minister of Dirco Lamola moved from the justice portfolio to international relations, having seen the international stage when South Africa took its genocide case against Israel to the International Court of Justice earlier this year. Lamola, a lawyer by trade, served the whole sixth administration as Minister of Justice and Correctional Services. He has two master's degrees from the University of Pretoria, the first in corporate law, the other in extractive law. He is a former deputy leader of the ANC Youth League, and during the state capture years, he once protested against former president Jacob Zuma. During his term in the justice portfolio, he often had to find funds for the National Prosecuting Authority and Office of the Public Protector. He played a key role in the establishment of the NPA's Investigating Directorate and in making this body permanent. Ronald Lamola is the new minister of Dirco. (Frennie Shivambu/Gallo Images) Gallo Images He also took a particular interest in the human rights of prisoners and is an outspoken Constitutionalist. During Parliamentary debates, he often referred to EFF leader Julius Malema as that party's "supreme leader". Foreign diplomats in South Africa on Sunday night seemed more concerned with the portfolios that will now be headed by DA MPs than with Lamola, the Cabinet member who will be at the centre of their work. Unlike some of his colleagues in the former Cabinet, Lamola is not unknown on the international scene, especially after his recent involvement in South Africa's genocide complaint against Israel. Nor - unlike some of his colleagues in the new and current Cabinet - is he seen as a loose cannon, likely to blunder about doing damage in the highly sensitive world of international diplomacy. READ | 'Unprecedented in the history of our democracy': South Africa finally has a GNU Cabinet "Well, he is a lawyer," said one foreign diplomat on Sunday night, explaining why Lamola can be expected to be careful and discreet when necessary. Perhaps most importantly, Lamola - who actively and fiercely campaigned against Zuma - is not considered likely to be sympathetic to any pro-MK camp within the ANC. Other appointees to the international relations and cooperation ministry may have required watching in case they sought to undermine the administration of Ramaphosa abroad, in subtle or sudden ways. Lamola, on the other hand, will be trusted as an envoy of the president, and is expected to continue work on Ramaphosa's priorities, much as did his predecessor Naledi Pandor, with no interruption by two deputy ministers also from the ANC. South Africa is currently most prominent on the issue of Israel's conduct in Gaza, but is also key to competing sides in the new geopolitical struggle. Lamola will find himself courted by Russia, which wants to use BRICS to bypass Western sanctions, by China as it seeks influence within Africa, and by the Western countries opposing Russia and China's ambitions. Lamola is also likely to be involved in debates around reform of the United Nations and its Security Council, structures and mechanisms for dealing with the effects of climate change, the potential spread of nuclear and biological warfare capabilities (including to South African partner Iran) - and will be under pressure to use South Africa's influence for good in Sudan's brutal civil war. Pieter Groenewald - Minister of Correctional Services Newly appointed Minister of Correctional Services, Groenewald is one of the longest serving members of Parliament, having first been elected to Parliament in 1989 as a member of the Conservative Party. Previously, he was the mayor of Stilfontein in the North West. He was a founding member of the FF Plus in 1994, and represented the party in the first democratic Parliament. He returned to the National Assembly in 2001 after a two-year stint as MPL in the North West Legislature. FF Plus leader Pieter Groenewald is the new minister of Correctional Services. (Alfonso Nqunjana/News24) News24 Groenewald has been one of the longest-serving members of the Portfolio Committee on Police. He obtained his B.Iuris degree at Potchefstroom University and completed a post-graduate diploma in communication. He obtained his master's degree in management and development and a doctorate degree in political studies at the North West University, according to an abridged CV on the FF Plus' website. In a statement released on Sunday evening after President Ramaphosa announced his executive, Groenewald said his party accepted the position in Cabinet to demonstrate its willingness to fulfil its role in the GNU to facilitate stability and progress in the country. "The party's participation in the Executive Authority will ensure that the right policy is implemented to create equal opportunities for everyone in the country. "The decision was also made in order to promote the FF Plus's policy directions with the sole aim of rebuilding South Africa and getting it back on the right track. "The party will always reserve its right to criticise and can assure the public that it will make full use of all governmental processes to serve the interests of voters." Thembi Nkadimeng - Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development Nkadimeng has moved from the cooperative governance and traditional affairs (Cogta) portfolio to justice and constitutional development. Her political involvement began as a student at the University of the North, where she was a leader of the Congress of South African Students (Cosas) and later the South African Student Congress (Sasco). The new minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, Thembi Nkadimeng. (Judas Sekwela/Daily Sun) Daily Sun She served in various leadership roles at branch level of the organisation from being elected the provincial secretary of Sasco, whose main task was to organise and mobilise students in all universities and about 22 colleges of education in the then Northern Transvaal, according to her profile on the Cogta website. Nkadimeng holds five qualifications: Bachelor of Arts from the University of the North, 1994; Higher Education Diploma, University of the North, 1995; Bachelor of Arts (Honours) – University of the North, 1997; BPhil (Policy Studies), University of Stellenbosch, 2001; and Management Advanced Programme, Wits Business School, 2009. After holding several positions in public service in the late 1990s and early 2000s, Nkadimeng worked for four years in the private sector as a corporate affairs manager at Anglo American Platinum before she became the mayor of Polokwane. She served in this position from 2014 to 2021. She was also the South African Local Government Association's president from 2019 to 2021. In 2021, she was appointed deputy Cogta minister before Ramaphosa appointed her as the minister in this portfolio in March 2023. Leon Schreiber - Minister of Home Affairs Schreiber has been the face of the DA's fight against the ANC's cadre deployment policy. In 2021, Schreiber introduced the End Cadre Deployment Bill during the State of the Nation Address debate. Leon Schreiber. (Supplied) Supplied In February, after a long court battle, the ANC handed over records of its national deployment committee as per a court order. And while the records were incomplete and heavily redacted, they did provide insight into the committee's workings, including indications of how it summoned ministers, and even President Ramaphosa, to explain themselves on the execution of their executive functions. Schreiber said he wanted to obtain meeting minutes, a list of decisions, WhatsApp conversations, email threads, CVs, and all other documents relevant to the work of all regional and provincial cadre deployment committees since 1 January 2013. Schreiber is also the strategy and communications advisor to DA leader John Steenhuisen. Mmamoloko "Nkhensani" Kubayi - Minister of Human Settlements Kubayi served as the minister of tourism and was then appointed as minister of human settlements from August 2021 to June 2024. She returned to the same position under the government of national unity. Prior to her current role, Kubayi previously served as a minister in three portfolios, Science and Technology, Communications, and Energy respectively. Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi (Fani Mahuntsi/Gallo Images) Gallo Images Kubayi started her career as a community developer in the non-governmental sector and subsequently joined the financial sector at First National Bank as a skills development specialist and later in the business banking division at Nedbank. She joined the public sector as a skills development facilitator at the National Health Laboratory Services and was then recruited to become a director in the Office of the Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka. She then served as the Parliamentary Advisor to the then Deputy President of South Africa, Kgalema Motlanthe. In 2006, she served as portfolio committee chairperson at the City of Johannesburg. In 2009, she became a member of Parliament and assumed several roles and responsibilities. She holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Johannesburg (formerly Vista University), a postgraduate diploma in Project Management from Damelin College, a master's degree in Public and Development Management from the University of the Witwatersrand and completed a Programme for Leadership Development at Harvard Business School. Velenkosini Hlabisa - Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs One of the leaders of former opposition parties who will now serve in Cabinet, is IFP leader Hlabisa, who will take over as Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. He will thus not only follow in the footsteps of Mangosuthu Buthelezi to lead the IFP, but also serve in Cabinet, as Buthelezi served under former presidents Nelson Mandela and Thabo Mbeki. Velenkosini Hlabisa is the new COGTA minister. (Alfonso Nqunjana/News24) News24 According to his profile on the People's Assembly, Hlabisa's passion for education led him to pursue a career in teaching. He was the principal of Somfula High School. He obtained an SSTD and B. Paed degree in history from the University of Zululand, and a BA honours degree in History from the University of South Africa. Having joined the IFP in 1978 at the age of 13, he rose to become the party's secretary-general before being elected the party's leader in 2019. He was the mayor of the Big 5 Hlabisa Local Municipality, served as an MPL in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature and became an MP in October 2023 John Steenhuisen - Minister of Agriculture Steenhuisen has been the leader of opposition in the sixth democratic Parliament. Now he is heading the department of agriculture in the government of national unity. When former DA leader Mmusi Maimane resigned as both leader and parliamentary leader of the DA in October 2019, Steenhuisen lost the position of chief whip. DA leader John Steenhuisen during a media interview at the election results centre in June 2024. (Alfonso Nqunjana/News24) News24 Steenhuisen then declared his candidacy to succeed Maimane as parliamentary leader and was elected unopposed on 27 October 2019. He formally announced on 28 October that he would run for federal leader of the party and was elected interim leader of the party on 17 November. Following an elective conference held virtually in 2020, Steenhuisen was elected party leader. He faced KwaZulu-Natal MPL Mbali Ntuli for the position. At the party's Federal Congress on 2 April 2023, it was announced that Steenhuisen had won a second term as party leader, defeating former Johannesburg mayor Mpho Phalatse. Khumbudzo Ntshavheni - Minister in the Presidency The 47-year-old Ntshavheni is one of a few ministers who has kept her position in the GNU. The Limpopo-born Ntshavheni has been a minister in the Presidency since March 2023 and this is her fourth appointment as a minister, with her first being in 2019 after that particular election. All her ministerial positions have been served under Ramaphosa. Khumbudzo Ntshavheni (OJ Koloti/Gallo Images) Gallo Images Ntshavheni's roles within the Presidency have been vast and included communications and state security. Under the GNU, these responsibilities have not been confirmed yet. Since 2021, the State Security Agency has been politically-led from within the Presidency, where Mondli Gungubele was its first minister. In 2023, Ntshavheni took over. The primary responsibility of the SSA is to gather and evaluate domestic and foreign intelligence. Nonceba Mhlauli and Kenneth Morolong have been appointed deputy ministers in the Presidency. Morolong keeps his position, while Mhlauli - an ANC youth league member - had been appointed as the second deputy minister. Maropene Ramokgopa - Minister of planning, monitoring and evaluation The 44-year-old Ramokgopa keeps her position as minister of this portfolio, which was established in 2023. It is unclear whether the ministry is now a stand-alone portfolio or if it will be held in the Presidency as previously was the case. The Limpopo-born Ramokgopa is the second deputy secretary-general of the ANC and has been a close ally of President Ramaphosa. Maropene Ramokgopa is the new minister of planning and evaluation. (Lubabalo Lesolle/Gallo Images) Gallo Images Earlier this month, she was tasked with acting as sports minister after Zizi Kodwa resigned due to corruption allegations. The deputy minister in this portfolio is the ANC's Seiso Mohai, who has been in the NCOP since 2013 and has served as majority chief whip in the NCOP since 2017. Mohai has never been a minister, though he first became an MP in 1999. Pemmy Majodina - Minister of Water and Sanitation Majodina, the former ANC chief whip in Parliament, hails from the Eastern Cape which she served on the National Council of Provinces. She has also been an MEC in her home province, occupying the portfolios of Health, Roads and Public Works, Social Development and Special Programmes, Sport, Recreation, Arts and Culture. It is unclear whether or not she has any experience delivering complex bulk water projects. Pemmy Majodina at the inauguration. (Alfonso Nqunjana/News24) Like most government departments, water and sanitation is emerging from the state capture years and calls for a senior politician, an experienced schoolmaster, who will keep the department, water boards, their executives, boards and all water services authorities on the straight and narrow while delivering on bulk infrastructure projects to ensure water security for all citizens. Majodina has something of a cloud over her head. In 2021 it was revealed that her son Mkhonto Wesizwe Majodina supplied PPE to the ANC's parliamentary caucus, of which Majodina was the leader. Sisisi Tolashe - Minister of Social Development After serving as deputy minister in the Presidency for Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities in the previous administration, Tolashe will now be the Social Development Minister. Tolashe's political career began in the Eastern Cape in the early 1980s, and she was remanded for three years in prison under section 29 and two years under the state of emergency which made it five years in prison, according to the Presidency's website. Tolashe was an MPL in the Eastern Cape legislature from 2002 to 2008. Sisisi Tolashe (Ziyaad Douglas/Gallo Images) Gallo Images She was first elected to Parliament in 2016 and resigned in February 2018 to become the mayor of the Enoch Mgijima Local Municipality in the Eastern Cape. She returned to the National Assembly in 2019, where she served on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA). She chaired the ad hoc committee that appointed Tsakani Maluleke as the auditor-general. She also served on the Section 194 Committee that handled former Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane's impeachment. Before that committee could conclude its work, Ramaphosa appointed her to his executive in March 2022. In 2023, Tolashe was elected as the ANC Women's League leader, defeating Bathabile Dlamini, who previously held the ministerial position Tolashe now holds. Sindisiwe Chikunga - Minister of women, youth, and persons with disabilities Chikunga has moved from the transport portfolio to women, youth, and persons with disabilities. She has been an ANC MP since 2004, which included a stint as the chairperson of the portfolio committee on police. Chikunga was the deputy transport minister from 2012 to 2019. Sindisiwe Chikunga (Craig Nieuwenhuizen/Foto24/Gallo Images) From 2019 to 2021, she was the deputy public service and administration minister, before Ramaphosa returned her to her previous position, before he appointed her as transport minister in March 2023. She holds a Master of Arts degree in Curationis from the University of Pretoria, a Bachelor of Arts degree in Curationis from the University of South Africa, a Diploma in Nursing Science from the Edenvale Nursing College and a Midwifery Diploma from the Edenvale Nursing College. She is currently studying Political Science at the University of South Africa. Gayton McKenzie - Minister of Sports, Art and Culture PA leader McKenzie made it publicly known that he wanted the Home Affairs portfolio to deport foreign nationals. However, he will be the new minister of sports, arts and culture. After his release from prison in 2003, where he was pardoned on a 15-year sentence for two separate robberies after lifting the lid on corruption at Grootvlei Prison, McKenzie became a motivational speaker and a businessperson with varied interests, including in the mining industry. Patriotic Alliance president Gayton McKenzie is the new minister of sports, arts and culture. (Sharon Seretlo/Gallo Images) Gallo Images He founded the PA in 2013, but the party first made an impact in the 2021 municipal elections. In the following year, McKenzie became the mayor of the Central Karoo District Municipality. His controversial tenure came to an end in 2023 when he resigned to focus on furthering his political ambitions. McKenzie has also authored several books.