Fikile Mbalula on Wednesday said Panyaza Lesufi would announce his executive. He admitted the DA and the ANC had not been able to resolve the impasse in forming a provincial government of unity. The DA accused the ANC of negotiating in bad faith. ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula said Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi would announce his executive on Wednesday, despite the impasse in forming a provincial government of unity (PGU). Addressing the media at the party's headquarters at Luthuli House in Johannesburg, Mbalula said it was "regrettable" that the DA and the ANC had not been able to find each other. "We wrote to the DA this morning to ask that we return to the negotiation table and not declare a deadlock. The ANC reiterates our firmly held conviction that the task of setting up a government in the economic heartland of our country is both urgent and overdue," said Mbalula. "It would be irresponsible to continue because we have an impasse with the DA, but we agree with the rest and the majority of the parties... [with whom] we do not have an impasse. The premier will soon be faced with a number of challenges without a Cabinet." He gave his assurance that the impasse would be resolved. Gauteng is the only province that has not yet formed a government. Flanked by Lesufi and ANC NEC member Febe Potgieter-Gqubule, Mbalula admitted that the negotiations to form a PGU had hit a major hurdle. Lesufi had postponed the announcement of his Cabinet on Monday and Tuesday due to the deadlock. The national leadership of the two parties has now stepped in to try to find a solution to the impasse. Mbalula said: It is our heartfelt wish that all parties, including the DA, will form part of a provincial government of unity to serve the people of Gauteng. We assure South Africans that the soon-to-be appointed Gauteng PGU will be expected to immediately get down to the pressing issues facing the Gauteng province and people at large. "A government of national unity (GNU) is not a grand coalition or a coalition between the DA and the ANC. It involves others. We encapsulate the spirit in our negotiations of the statement of negotiation of inclusiveness in terms of engagements." "We cannot allow the impasse in Gauteng to continue," says Mbalula. Mbalula says on Wednesday morning, the ANC wrote a letter to the DA to resolve the impasse. He says Gauteng Premier, Panyaza Lesufi, WILL announce his executive on Wednesday evening. @News24 pic.twitter.com/uiD0Ig1jWa — Amanda Khoza - The Journalist (@MandaKhoza) July 3, 2024 Mbalula said the ANC and the DA had agreed on the GNU and a multiparty arrangement of engaging with everybody to form that government. Lesufi said the Gauteng executive would be announced on Wednesday evening. "And it is definitely not going to be postponed. We are going to announce a Cabinet that is going to represent the people of Gauteng. We are ready to announce a government of Gauteng this evening [Wednesday], and this government of Gauteng will be an inclusive government that will reflect everyone that is willing to work, and that is willing to take this province forward," the premier said. The ANC's national chairperson, Gwede Mantashe, told News24 he was confident that a new Cabinet would be formed in Gauteng by the end of Wednesday. "Gauteng will have a new government by the end of Wednesday. We are going to work with whoever wants to work with us," said Mantashe. READ | Stalemate in Gauteng as DA refuses 'to be taken hostage in a government of provincial unity' The DA made the announcement that it had decided to walk away from negotiations in Gauteng and would rather sit on the opposition benches. In a statement, the DA's Solly Msimanga said: "After robust engagements and negotiations stretching over weeks, we have declined to take up seats on the ANC's terms and will not form part of the executive in Gauteng. "After a prolonged engagement, involving various senior members of parties on both ends, we found ourselves unable to accept a counter to our offer. The offer made to the DA was and continues to be one we find both unfair and unreasonable." Msimanga said it was impossible for the DA to be "co-opted into government" when they were meant to be "power-sharing partners". "We will not be functionaries who rubber stamp decisions made by an executive that, evidently, is intent on keeping us on the edge of the fray," said Msimanga. MUST WATCH: Reacting to the news that the DA has walked out of the Gauteng Provincial Government of Unity (PGU) talks, Mbalula says: "It's fine. I will not respond on the podium." @News24 pic.twitter.com/zQ0JTefQYD — Amanda Khoza - The Journalist (@MandaKhoza) July 3, 2024 Msimanga added: "Beyond the problematic nature of an attitude that seemingly does not understand what their significant loss of the vote share in Gauteng entails, an air of refusal to be partners, which ultimately is the goal, dominated conversations." Had both parties negotiated in good faith, the situation might have been different. "The Democratic Alliance has a long history of being a strong and unforgiving thorough opposition. We are both comfortable and proud to enter back into the opposition benches from where we will serve the people of Gauteng." Mbalula said the DA had decided to walk away from the talks, and then added: "It's fine." Lesufi is expected to make his announcement at 20:00.