The MK Party has asked the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg to set aside the election of portfolio committee chairs, the chair of chairs and the chief whip of the KwaZulu-Natal legislature. The party says the allocation of seats is "unconstitutional". It says its members should chair committees if the proportional representation system is used according to the number of seats parties have. The MK Party has asked the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg to review and set aside the "unconstitutional" composition of portfolio committees in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature. The ANC secured seven of 10 chairperson positions, including the chair of chairs post in the Pietermaritzburg-based legislature. The MK Party wants an order interdicting and restraining the committees from performing their functions. It also wants committees' re-establishment in line with the proportional representation system. However, the legislature's lawyers contend that the MK Party's "fallacious" arguments disregard political plurality. READ | KZN legislature committee appointments undemocratic - EFF and MKP claim In court papers, filed by Sipho Ngubane Attorneys, the MK Party argues that it, as the party which has the most MPs, should have most of the chairperson posts. It says the IFP's Blessed Gwala should be removed as the House's chief whip and that it should take the post instead. A report legislature speaker Nontembeko Boyce had tabled the allocation of 11 seats in 12 committees. ANC treasurer Ntuthuko Mahlaba was elected the chair of chairs on 9 July. Other appointments included: Former education MEC Mbali Frazer as chairperson of the premier and community safety portfolio. Bongokwakhe Zuma, former MEC for agriculture and rural development, chairs the same portfolio. ANC spokesperson Mafika Mndebele was appointed as the chair of economic development and tourism. Former Cogta MEC Bongi Sithole Moloi chairs the environmental home affairs and tourism. ANC MPL Mthandeni Dlungwane chairs the finance portfolio committee. Sizophila Mkhize, former ANC Youth League member, is appointed as the chair of sport, arts and culture portfolio committee. The formula Boyce used saw the MK Party bag four seats in each committee, the IFP two, the ANC two, the DA two, and the EFF one. But, in an affidavit, MK Party provincial organiser and MPL Sthembiso Magubane argued that Boyce's formula was "irrational, unreasonable and unconstitutional". The MK Party had garnered 45.38% (37 seats) electoral support, followed by the IFP's 18.07% (15 seats), the ANC's 16.99% (15 seats), the DA's 13.36% (11 seats), the EFF's 2.26% (two seats), and the NFP's 0.56% (one seat). The party argues that parties are entitled to be allocated committee seats on the basis of proportional percentages as follows: MK Party - 45.5% of 11 = 4.9885; IFP - 18.07 of 11 = 1.9877; ANC - 16.99 of 11 = 1.8689; DA - 13.36% of 11 = 1.4696; EFF - 2.26% of 11 = 0.2486; and NFP - 0.56% of 11 = 0.6. In the affidavit, Magubane also submitted: Should the fractions be rounded off to the first decimal, then the MK should have five seats, IFP two, ANC two, DA one, and the remaining seat goes to the minorities. The formula which the speaker, however, devised and employed, reduced the applicant's number of seats to only four seats. The one seat taken from the applicant was allocated to the DA. "It is thus evident that what the speaker effectively did was to donate a seat from the applicant in each committee to the DA. There is simply no rational basis why only the [MK Party] was deprived of a seat [which was] then given to the DA. In fact, all the other parties retained their full proportional complement of seats," Magubane added. "The inference seems to be inescapable that the intention of the speaker was to reduce the representation of the applicant in all the committees. De facto, the applicant should have representation of five seats in all the committees." ALSO READ | KZN legislature committee appointments undemocratic - EFF and MKP claim Chief whip election The MK Party advanced the argument that the amendment to the Standing Rules on 9 July 2024, which essentially made way for the government of provincial unity bloc to appoint the chief whip, was "irrational, unreasonable, and unconstitutional". They argued that the position conventionally belongs to the largest party in the House. "The largest party in the legislature can never be a coalition of smaller parties. A coalition of smaller parties is plainly not in itself a party," Magubane said in the affidavit. The party avers that the election of the chief whip wasn't conducted through a participatory democracy process and was out of step with Section 116(1)(b). Boyce's response In a preliminary answering affidavit, Boyce said the MK Party's entire submission was bereft of the applicable constitutional principles and did not make out a case to justify its request for the court's interference in the running of the legislature. Boyce said re-establishing the committees would "frustrate the democratic will of the people" and that the rule of law would be harmed. Moreover, if granted, the request would "artificially and unconstitutionally" elevate the principle of proportionality over minority party protection, and that would "irredeemably" undermine the separation of powers principle. Boyce said she was "meticulous" in formulating seats allocation. Legislature speaker Nontembeko Boyce. (KZN Legislature/Supplied) She pointed out that the application was instituted without the joinder of the relevant political parties, meaning that the IFP, ANC, DA, and other possibly affected parties that have a substantial interest in the matter were not cited. These parties, she argued, would be prejudiced if they lost a seat without being represented or having access to the court. Boyce added that the MK Party's application for urgent relief was "based on a fallacy". Furthermore, she said the application was "constitutionally invasive", and if granted, it would obstruct the new legislature from performing its functions. According to Boyce, the formula used was as follows: First, each party, with the NFP and EFF representing minorities as a collective, was allocated one representative. This was done to allow for compliance with Section 116(2)(b) of the Constitution, which requires the participation of minority parties in a manner consistent with democracy. Boyce added: "The NFP was excluded as its single member is in the executive council and thus cannot attend committee meetings, and the seat was accordingly allocated to the EFF, a minority party (which did not qualify for a seat). This resulted in the allocation of five seats in total to five parties, each with one seat." After that allocation, six of the 11 seats remained to be allocated. "The parties' representation in the legislature (i.e. the number of seats allocated to each party) was then utilised to allocate the remaining seats. This generated a figure for each party, representing the number of the six remaining seats to which each party was entitled," she added. "Fractions were rounded up or down (as the case may be), and the six remaining seats were allocated accordingly," she said. Addressing the election of the IFP's chief whip, Boyce said: "There is presently no majority party in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature. The largest party is the applicant, but no party holds a majority (meaning 50%+ 1)." Therefore, she added, the MK Party is not entitled to the appointment of the chief whip position. She also contended that the MK Party didn't explain to the court why the matter should be heard on an urgent basis.