Former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party has appointed its fourth secretary-general. This comes after the party issued letters to four party leaders informing them of the changes. But the party's most recent secretary-general, Arthur Zwane, said that he had resigned with immediate effect. Former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party has appointed its fourth secretary-general in less than six months. This after its most recent secretary-general, Arthur Zwane, said that he resigned with immediate effect in writing on 1 July - months after the party appointed him to replace Sihle Ngubane. Ngubane had replaced Thanduxolo "Gorbachev" Dyodo, who was dismissed after a series of administrative bungles. In Zwane's resignation letter, he wrote: "In the last two weeks, I have realised that the volume of work in my office is huge and beyond my limits, especially because I have other competing business interests that I'm pursuing." Zuma, however, had a different version of events. According to the MKP leader, he had written a letter of his own to Zwane to say that he was "relinquishing" him as the secretary-general. READ | Zuma top loyalists in the ANC appointed to MK Party in leadership shake-up The letter to Zwane was part of a series of a four letters - dated 28 June - that Zuma had written to make changes to the party's leadership. The other three were to Sifiso Maseko, Menzi Magubane and Danisa Zulu. Maseko was appointed secretary-general with immediate effect and Magubane was appointed "with immediate effect" or " with effect from the date of acceptance, whichever comes first". MK new appointments:Dr Sifiso Maseko - SGMR Menzi Magubane -TG pic.twitter.com/k4aCWCkp5Z — uMkhonto Wesizwe Info Centre (@MKParty_InfoGuy) July 2, 2024 Zulu, who was appointed as the treasurer-general during a leadership shake-up in March, was removed. Zuma wrote to Zulu: "Owing to the need of using our limited and available human capital efficiently, I have decided to relinquish you from the treasurer-general functions with immediate effect."