Jacob Zuma cracked the whip in his MK Party by firing its administration boss amid allegations of infighting. Secretary-general Arthur Zwane tendered his resignation as the administration head, citing his demanding "business interests". But Zuma actually fired him amid allegations of mismanagement and internal ructions over parliamentary lists. Former president Jacob Zuma decided over the weekend to fire MK Party secretary-general Arthur Zwane after allegations of "mismanagement". Zwane was appointed only two weeks ago as a replacement for Sihle Ngubane. His political prospects elsewhere are also dim as provincial ANC secretary Bheki Mtolo said the party won't be speaking to Zwane about a potential return. In a leadership shake-up in late March, the MK Party moved to place the former ANC president's loyalists in top positions, with former police minister Nkosinathi Nhleko joining as a national leader, while then acting secretary-general Thanduxolo "Gorbachev" Dyodo was replaced by Ngubane. Zwane isn't the party's first secretary-general to be shown the door after allegations of mismanagement. READ | Zuma top loyalists in the ANC appointed to MK Party in leadership shake-up Dyodo, earlier this year, came under fire when he told a radio station that he was still a member of the ANC. There was speculation that the MK Party almost failed to register because Dyodo had disappeared with files containing signatures. And now, Zwane, who joined only a fortnight ago, is no longer a leader. Zuma and Zwane gave conflicting reasons for the decision to remove the latter. A person with knowledge of the events told News24 that Zwane was fired on Friday after a disagreement with Zuma about the management of the party. READ | MK Party secretary-general Arthur Zwane resigns. But Zuma says he was fired In a letter to the MK Party on Monday, Zwane said he was resigning because his business interests were occupying most of his time. But that's not how Zuma saw it. In a note on Tuesday night on the party's website, the MK Party said "the removal" of Zwane from his position was a "decision taken by party leader Jacob Zuma". The note came just days after Zwane wrote a memo to provincial structures in an attempt to manage "conflicts within our party's operational dynamics". It was unclear which provinces Zwane was referring to. In that memo, Zwane said: "It has come to our attention that several provinces have been making independent decisions regarding the deployment of task team members to various key positions, including but not limited to chairs of committees and whips in legislatures." In Tuesday's note on the party website, the MK Party said the removal of Zwane came after "concerns" over his "leadership and internal party dynamics". The party added: Arthur Zwane was appointed secretary-general two weeks ago, with high expectations for his leadership. However, internal conflicts and allegations of mismanagement necessitated his removal. President Jacob Zuma, prioritising the party's integrity and unity, decided immediate action was needed. The MK Party acknowledged "the need for strong, cohesive leadership". The note further said: Zwane's removal is part of a broader strategy to resolve internal issues and ensure the party remains focused on its mission to advocate for social justice and economic reform. The MK Party said it was appointing a new secretary-general, who would "uphold the party's values and work towards achieving its goals". "Senior leaders will convene to discuss the next steps and ensure a smooth transition," the party said. "The MK Party remains dedicated to maintaining the highest standards of integrity and transparency. This leadership change is a step towards strengthening the party and better serving the interests of the South African people." A person with inside knowledge told News24 the axe had been hovering over Zwane's head for some time. Attempts to reach Zwane for comment proved futile, while MK Party spokesperson Nhlamulo Ndhlela's phone rang unanswered.