The MK Party withdrew its application to have the 2024 general elections set aside. It claimed that fraud and vote-rigging had altered the outcome. The party is yet to substantiate its claims, and it could relaunch its application. After weeks of an unrelenting campaign to try to discredit the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC), former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party dropped its court application related to untested allegations of widespread voter fraud. In a notice issued on Wednesday, the MK Party said it was withdrawing its application at the Electoral Court to challenge the election results. The MK Party's "experts" are still collating evidence of vote-rigging, the party's lawyer said in a letter to the IEC's legal team. In mid-June, the MK Party claimed the application was "necessary for the entrenchment into our constitutional system reverence for our constitutional right to choose leaders". Zuma's party sought a court order to declare that the elections were not free and fair, and that President Cyril Ramaphosa should proclaim new elections within 90 days. READ | MK Party asks Electoral Court to set aside elections However, a message circulating on Wednesday night among MK Party leaders and members read: Due to the IEC's answering affidavit that brings elements that further strengthen our case, we're changing our legal strategy to strengthen our case. We are going on stronger. The spokesperson is working with the lawyers on the issuance of a statement to quell the concerns and to quell public noise. MK Party's attorney, Barnabas Xulu, who worked on the application, couldn't be reached. MK Party's spokesperson, Nhlamulo Ndhlela, was asked whether the party would bring the application back at a later date. He couldn't be reached on the phone. A letter by Xulu to the IEC's legal team confirmed the "temporary withdrawal". "The withdrawal is in no way an admission that our client does not have a compelling case for the orders it seeks. The contrary is true," Xulu said in the letter. He said MK Party "experts" were being engaged and would "continue to uncover further evidence of election irregularities". "The MK Party's experts require time to prepare comprehensive reports involving a thorough assessment of the IEC results," the letter read. In the run-up to the elections, the party claimed it was on course to a two-thirds majority - and it would use this to change the Constitution. Before, during, and after the elections, the party sought to discredit the IEC. In the IEC's responding affidavit to the Electoral Court, the chief electoral officer, Sy Mamabolo, stated that the MK Party "has misrepresented the actual election data and results and that its central allegation - that over 9.3 million votes are unaccounted for - is patently false". "When these egregious allegations were made, the applicant must have been aware of the absence of evidence to support them, but elected to make them nevertheless. The only inference that can be drawn from this approach is that these allegations were made with the aim of inflaming the passions of the public," Mamabolo said. READ | MK Party's two-week special: Zuma fires admin boss amid 'mismanagement' allegations Earlier last month, Zuma's party applied to the Constitutional Court to interdict the National Assembly session, during which members would be sworn in, and the speaker, deputy speaker and president elected. However, it told the Constitutional Court it would not provide its "large and growing body of evidence", to back its allegations, "at this stage". The apex court handed down a judgment, finding it was not in the court's jurisdiction to hear the case, it was not in the interest of justice to grant direct access because the party "self-created" the urgency, and the application was meritless because the party had failed to show "it will suffer irreparable harm if the interdict is not granted". "The applicant has also misconstrued the relevant constitutional provisions it seeks to rely on. In addition, the applicant has not adduced facts to establish a prima facie case in respect of the relief it will seek in the main application, in order to sustain an interim interdict, pending the main application," read the ruling.