After being found guilty of misconduct and incompetence, Busisiwe Mkhwebane was removed as Public Protector. She insists that she is entitled to the R10-million gratuity given to outgoing Public Protectors. Parliament says she is not entitled to this gratuity because she was removed and did not vacate the office. Paying a gratuity to Busisiwe Mkhwebane, who was removed as Public Protector for misconduct and incompetence, would "threaten the founding and fundamental constitutional value of accountability," stated National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza in court papers. After a protracted impeachment process, Mkhwebane was removed as Public Protector in September last year. Hardly a month later, she joined the EFF and was sworn in to represent the party in the National Assembly within a week. In March, she launched an application to the Gauteng High Court in Pretoria to force her erstwhile office to pay her a R10-million gratuity she insists is "rightfully" hers. Public Protectors are entitled to a gratuity upon their vacation of office. Mkhwebane, however, was removed from office due to misconduct and incompetence. And this is one of the points Didiza makes on behalf of Parliament in a responding affidavit. Didiza stated that the term "vacation from office" as used in service conditions for the Public Protector, which regulates the payment of the gratuity, "is distinct from and exclusive of a removal from office under section 194 of the Constitution on the grounds of misconduct and incompetence". "It follows that Adv Mkhwebane has no right to the payment of the gratuity," stated Didiza. Didiza also said that the service conditions ensure that a Public Protector "is held accountable for exercising their powers, is deterred from engaging in misconduct and does not seek to remain in office when they are incompetent". "The payment of a gratuity to a person like Adv Mkhwebane, who has been removed from office as the Public Protector under Section 194 of the Constitution on the basis of misconduct and incompetence, would threaten the foundational and fundamental constitutional value of accountability," Didiza stated. READ | Mkhwebane bemoans 'drastic reduction' in income as EFF MP, sues Public Protector for R10m In her application, Mkhwebane stated that it had "always been my intention to use part of the money due to me to fund the required litigation to challenge my illegal removal by launching a fresh application to declare such removal illegal and/or set it aside". Didiza also responded to this in her answering affidavit, stating that Mkhwebane "has no entitlement to access further public funds to challenge her removal as the Public Protector because, not only was her removal lawful, but she has unreasonably delayed bringing her review of 'a decision' made on 12 September 2023." "She also has no reasonable prospects of succeeding with her intended review of her removal." The Office of the Public Protector is also opposing Mkhwebane's application.