The MKP and EFF are pushing back against the "vision of a united, democratic, non-sexist and prosperous South Africa", said ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula. He was responding to the debate on President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address, where the MKP and EFF sought to paint the ANC as "sell-outs" working with the "oppressor". Mbalula said Ramaphosa's OPA addresses the nation's most burning issues and implements the ANC's manifesto. After the MK Party (MKP) and EFF sought to paint the ANC as "sell-outs" working with the "oppressor", ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula said these "politically bankrupt" parties only represent a "push-back against the vision of a united, democratic, non-sexist and prosperous South Africa". At a media briefing on Saturday, Mbalula said the ANC welcomed the immediate priorities Ramaphosa identified on Thursday evening when he delivered the Opening of Parliament Address (OPA), "which reflect the priorities identified by the ANC in its 2024 manifesto to advance the building of a united, non-racist, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa". He said that the three priorities – drive inclusive growth and job creation, reduce poverty and tackle the high cost of living, and build a capable, ethical and developmental state – respond to the nation's most burning issues. "The liberation of Africans, in particular, and black people in general, from political and economic bondage, uplifting the quality of life of all South Africans, especially the working class and poor, the majority of whom are Africans and women, remains at the centre of ANC policy," said Mbalula. Mbalula said Friday's debate on the OPA indicated that there is consensus on the triple challenges facing the country: unemployment, poverty and inequality. READ | Ramaphosa hails GNU as chance to make SA better, promises faster economic reforms During the debate, the so-called progressive caucus advanced the notion that the ANC sold out by working with the "oppressor", the DA, in the government of national unity (GNU). MKP leader in Parliament, and the first judge to be removed in a democratic South Africa, John Hlope said: "The establishment of the government of national unity is singularly a very cruel joke by the Ramaphosa faction of the ANC and the Democratic Alliance perpetuated against the oppressed and downtrodden masses of our people." "My question to you, president, is this: Through what magic do you hope to forge a national unity of the oppressor and the oppressed? The exploiter and the exploited? The rich capitalist and the exploited and toiling working class?" Hlophe asked. EFF leader Julius Malema said to Ramaphosa: "In the battle against neo-colonialism, you chose the side of the oppressor. "You boldly take this counter-revolutionary decision because you know you have the protection of white capital." Mbalula said on Saturday: "Of course, given the ideological range represented in Parliament, there will be disagreement, represented in the colourful rhetoric and pretences we heard yesterday [Friday], that some, for their own survival and exposing their political bankruptcy, want to present the ANC as having sold out the people. "When their own ethno-nationalism, backwardness inconsistency constitutes a betrayal of the people." Talking about the EFF, Mbalula said: "Even during the sixth administration, they consistently voted with the party they now despise against progressive policies introduced by the African National Congress." He said they are in "so-called progressive coalition with others of their ilk". "Yet, all they represent is a push-back against the vision of a united, democratic, non-sexist and prosperous South Africa." "What does the EFF stand for, when they have voted with the DA?" "Every time they have had an opportunity to work with the ANC, they threw us out," said Mbalula, before listing times the EFF voted with the DA to remove the ANC from the pound seats in municipalities. READ | OPA debate: GNU parties warn against populism, attacks on the Constitution He said it is an "opportunistic position to define the GNU as a sell-out" and that the parties in Parliament "who are very colourful in their rhetoric" are not the ANC's friends. "Zuma decided to break the ANC and divide it, and it is not going to stop." He said Zuma doesn't have a programme of action other than "sending a questionable judge to Parliament". "Just to spit in the face of South Africa he brings Hlophe, and even sends him to the JSC (Judicial Service Commission), just to show us he has got no respect for constitutionalism." "What does Hlophe say, the first thing [when] he is asked 'why did you agree to lead this party?' He says, 'No, it is because they embrace Zulu monarchy', and then 'I'm proud Zulu'." Mbalula said this shows the MKP's ethno-nationalistic character. "He doesn't say, 'I'm happy as a democrat to participate in the discourse and to lead a party'. Because that party does not have a meaning except a grievance," said Mbalula. "Now, the bankruptcy of these characters, you are going to see it, going forward. But it must not deter us from doing what is right for the people of South Africa." In contrast to the so-called progressive caucus's divisive, populist and racial contribution to the debate, the parties belonging to the GNU expressed support for Ramaphosa's agenda and called for unity. The DA, however, was open to stating where they differed from the ANC. During the debate, DA leader and Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen said: "While the government of national unity has met the requirement for sufficient consensus as outlined in the statement of intent on some key matters of economic policy, it is important to acknowledge that there are still areas of divergence that require attention." "For example: the need for universal health coverage is obvious to us all, as are the serious problems of corruption and mismanagement in the public health sector." He asaid: But the National Health Insurance (NHI) in its current form does not do enough to address these problems, while its focus on taking away the rights of medical workers and consumers to access medical aid and private care is misplaced. He also mentioned the Basic Education Laws Amendment (BELA) Bill in this regard. "However, in all of these areas of divergence, I am convinced that we can find a way forward. "It will require us to be honest about disagreements where they do exist, and to work in good faith with one another to find solutions." READ | GNU contradictions: Parties clash over NHI in first debate of seventh Parliament DA MP Michéle Clarke expressed her party's concerns with the NHI, and DA MP Delmaine Christians elaborated on its concerns with the BELA Bill. Deputy Finance Minister Ashor Sarupen, from the DA, appeared enthusiastic about the economic programme Ramaphosa announced but added: "However, we do have points of divergence. "The president's commitment to 'broad-based black economic empowerment and employment equity' needs a serious re-evaluation. Every party included in the GNU agrees that we must achieve better economic outcomes for the poor and address historical imbalances. The DA strongly believes in redress – but we cannot create or support new systems of exclusion." On Saturday, Mbalula said, without naming any parties: "On the other extreme of the spectrum of liberal conservatism, there are those with us who cannot deny the moral and just cause of redress as set out by the Constitution of the republic. And yet, they continue to want to cling to their privileges, to deny universal health coverage to the majority, and to prevent our schools from providing equal opportunities to all." Mbalula added that the ANC "will not compromise on the NHI". "As you heard in the Opening of Parliament Address, there is no retreat in this regard," he said. READ | Ramaphosa confident GNU partners will find consensus on NHI Mbalula seems to be taking a harder stance than Ramaphosa. In his OPA he said: "Now, while there is much contestation around the NHI, there is broad agreement that we must draw on the resources and capabilities of both the public and private sectors to meet the healthcare needs of all South Africans equally. "In implementing the NHI, we are confident that we will be able to bring stakeholders together and that we will be able to resolve differences and clarify misunderstandings." Seen in the ANC's Western Cape office, where they clearly think President Cyril Ramaphosa is cut out to lead the country. (Jan Gerber/News24) Then, appearing to diverge from his prepared speech, Ramaphosa added: "Now, as the government of national unity, we have agreed that we will seek to build consensus around issues that we may not agree on. And there are a number of issues that we agree on. What unites us? We are united on many issues. And there are issues that we still need to find full agreement on. And yes, we will work hard to make sure that we do find agreement." Mbalula also said that BEE "remains a central pillar" of ANC policy and that the party remains "unwavering" on defending the "hard won rights of workers". Nonetheless, Mbalula said: "There is more that unites us than divides us." He said while the GNU parties might disagree on tactics, they agree on the overarching objectives. The GNU isn't a melting pot, Mbalula said. "It does not mean that when parties arrive in the legislature, they must toe the line." Mbalula remained steadfast that the ANC's policies would not be diluted in the GNU. He said the purpose of the GNU is to bring stability. "We are advocating for the stability of this country." "It is in the interest of the people of this country to have a stable government."