President Cyril Ramaphosa has officially opened Parliament. Moments before Ramaphosa took to the podium, members and guests called on him to announce clear policies. The opening of Parliament was characterised by pomp and ceremony. President Cyril Ramaphosa must announce clear policies on growing the economy, food security and jobs for young people. This was the call from MPs, guests and some dignitaries who spoke to News24 as they made their way down the red carpet to the Cape Town City Hall. Members of Jacob Zuma's MK Party made a dramatic entrance as they sang the former president's signature Umshini Wami song. LIVE | President Cyril Ramaphosa delivers Opening of Parliament Address. Follow it live on News24 New government of national unity (GNU) leaders recently met in Pretoria to outline plans for an event Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana described as the "true test". Godongwana said he wanted to hear Ramaphosa's strategic direction for the next five years. "The departments will have to translate them into programmes, and we'll have to indicate through the medium-term budget policy statement how we are going to finance those programmes. "I mean, everyone wants the economy to grow. The president will say something in that direction and with regard to the journey." He added the success of last weekend's Cabinet Lekgotla was proof the GNU had passed the most challenging hurdle. "I think we've overcome most of the challenges. Last weekend was a test as to whether we are likely to agree on the strategic direction of the government of national unity, and indications are that we are almost 99% in agreement on the strategic direction, which to me, is an important hurdle to pass," Godongwana said. Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald added while he was eager to hear Ramaphosa outline clear policies, implementation was crucial. He said: It is on the Cabinet ministers to ensure that it is not only policies on paper; we must ensure that the policies are implemented. We must ensure results. That's the only way we can create a better South Africa.