MPs are concerned about the capacity shortages of the police's Crime Intelligence Division. Speaking in the police budget vote debate on Tuesday, UDM MP Nqabayomzi Kwankwa used his own recent abduction to highlight this problem. Parliamentary newcomers BOSA, Rise Mzansi and NCC also expressed concern over the police's spending on VIP protection services. An MP used his own recent brush with violent crime to shine a spotlight on an issue several MPs raised during the police's budget vote debate: a lack of investment in the Crime Intelligence Division to prevent crime rather than deal with it after the fact. Last month, when UDM deputy leader Nqabayomzi Kwankwa was travelling to the Cape Town International Airport to attend President Cyril Ramaphosa's inauguration the following day in Pretoria, he was abducted. His captors demanded a R10 000 ransom, which the UDM paid. Participating on the police's budget vote debate in a mini-plenary of the National Assembly on Tuesday, Kwankwa spoke about his kidnapping and extortion experience. "Everything happened in full view of the public in the middle of the road," he said. "Even when I was taken to this place where I was supposed to be killed, the same thing happened. There were people passing behind me and I counted five different footsteps of people who were told not to pay attention, to mind their own business, while I was tied up, ready to be shot. "It concerned me because our people are living in fear. They are living in fear of criminal wherever we go." READ | UDM deputy president safe after being kidnapped on way to Cape Town airport - Holomisa Kwankwa said this showed that the police needed to invest more in Crime Intelligence. "We need to detect and prevent crime rather than react to it." He said it was problem that Crime Intelligence received less than 5% of the police's budget. "It needs to be looked into, otherwise we are not preventative." He wasn't the only MP to raise this issue; in fact, most did. DA MP and chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police Ian Cameron said he was deeply concerned about the continued capacity shortages in Crime Intelligence and detective services within the police. "These areas are critical for proactively reducing crime and ensuring effective prosecutions. During the recently held budget hearings, the committee highlighted the need for enhanced training and human resource capacitation in these core service delivery areas," he said. He said the DA "urges that spending must focus on improving ground-level resources, growing detective services, re-establishing specialised units, and the restructuring of Crime Intelligence units". NCC leader Fadiel Adams said he could not support a budget that provided more for the protection of VIPs than Crime Intelligence. "It is unthinkable." In the 2024/25 budget, the Protection and Security Services, which includes the VIP Protection Unit, gets R4.099 billion, of which R2.177 billion goes to the VIP Protection Unit. Crime Intelligence gets R4.747 billion, and the Hawks R2.412 billion. READ | Presidential protectors get R600m more than GBV, child violence division in 'skewed' SAPS budget This spending on VIP protection was also taken up by fellow parliamentary newcomers Rise Mzansi and BOSA. Rise Mzansi MP Makashule Gana, turning to the front benches, said VIPs had 24-hour protection while South Africans had to fend for themselves while they are spending R4 billion to "protect politicians". "If there is one line item that does not reduce, it is the protection of politicians. Why? Why?" asked Gana. "Do we need so many bodyguards? What is it? You are scared of something. But South Africans, when they call the police they are told there are no vehicles. But ministers, deputy ministers, have got vehicles. Is this fair? "You are actually saying politicians are more equal than ordinary South Africans. "Please cut the fat, politicians are not more important than the ordinary citizens." BOSA deputy leader Nobuntu Hlazo-Webster said the whole of South African society was negatively affected by crime. "While 61 million South Africans live in fear, SAPS has the audacity to allocate over R2 billion this year alone for the VIP protection of politicians of the GNU [government of national unity]. "This is the same amount of funds allocated to the Hawks to combat violent crime, organised and commercial crime, and corruption. And it is more than what is allocated to the Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Violence Unit," she said. She said: To add, the amount allocated to VIP politician protection will continue to grow as the national executive continues to bloat under this GNU. We now have 75 members of the executive - the largest it has ever been. She said her party denounces the "celebrity-like treatment of politicians in a country where 83 people are murdered every day". "It is a moral necessity for the minister of police to review this allocation and redirect these funds to fighting crime that affects ordinary South Africans." In the previous term, the DA also raised the issue of the VIP protection budget vociferously. They didn't raise it specifically on Tuesday. The DA now has 12 members of the executive, who are entitled to protection services. MK Party MP David Skosana (husband of EFF MP Busisiwe Mkhwebane), also didn't address VIP protection directly, but called for greater equality in the provision of policing services. "It's time for a new era of policing in South Africa, one that values the community partnership and concern. The MK Party is committed to lead this transformation in creating a safer, more just society for all, not only for the elite. "If you go around town in Cape Town here, there are so many policemen and women. You go to Khayelitsha and Gugulethu, it leaves much to be desired," said Skosana, whose party leader, corruption-accused Jacob Zuma, still receives VIP protection as former head of state. Responding to the debate, Police Minister Senzo Mchunu said: "We are agreeing in this House that the safety of the South African people is the number one priority." "The budget that is allocated here, will be used exactly for that." EFF MP Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said he wanted to ask Mchunu how the R4 billion for protection services was going to fight crime. Mchunu didn't answer.