ANC KwaZulu-Natal secretary Bheki Mtolo believes Nehawu-affiliated workers are the cause of most government failures at a service delivery level. Mtolo's jab at Nehawu comes just days after the union organised a "political school" gathering where SACP boss Solly Mapaila took aim at the ANC over the government of national unity. The union has asked Mtolo to publicly apologise or it will take him to court. ANC KwaZulu-Natal secretary Bheki Mtolo looks set to be dragged to court by the Cosatu-affiliated National Education Health and Allied Workers' Union (Nehawu) following divergent views on the government of provincial unity that have led to accusations, counter-accusations and insults. This comes a month after the SA Communist Party (SACP), SA National Civic Organisation and Cosatu in KwaZulu-Natal registered their dissatisfaction with provincial ANC leaders over their apparent lack of consultation on political developments, especially in government of provincial unity talks. Last week, during a "political school" gathering organised by Nehawu, its president Mike Shingange and SACP secretary-general Solly Mapaila spoke out against the government of national unity (GNU), with the labour leader calling it a business and political "elite pact". READ | EFF agrees with SACP’s Mapaila that ANC would be better off with them in GNU, instead of the DA Mtolo, speaking in an address to ANC supporters in Shayamoya, Kokstad, over the weekend, said the "noise" against the GNU was about positions. "Don't be frustrated by the fight for positions. President Cyril Ramaphosa has shown that the GNU isn't about selling out black South Africans," he said. Turning his attention to Nehawu, he said: Others are saying [they] don't want the GNU. Nehawu's people are at Home Affairs. When you get to Home Affairs seeking a death certificate, and you are not given attention by the staff, that's Nehawu's fault. When ambulances take time to get to your home, the cause behind that is Nehawu. Mtolo said Nehawu-affiliated workers in the public health sector were disregarding citizens' welfare. He cited examples of workers shutting down hospitals and turning ambulances away during wage-related protests. "That's what they have become. To them, it's money first and everything comes secondary, including lives," he said. This didn't sit well with Nehawu's KwaZulu-Natal secretary Ayanda Zulu, who issued a statement, calling Mtolo "deranged and reckless", a "political buffoon" and a "mad man". Zulu said: At worst, when people like Mtolo were under lockdown restrictions of Covid-19 in 2020, Nehawu members were at the forefront risking their lives and their loved ones in defence of the South African nation against the vicious pandemic, without protective measures and with no token of appreciation from the ANC-led government which Mtolo is a provincial secretary to. Yet, Zulu added, Mtolo "has the audacity" to criticise Nehawu members when he could be criss-crossing the province accounting to members of the ANC on his leadership's "inability to take the ANC to an outright election victory, than justifying the GNU to cushion his inability to give confidence to the KwaZulu-Natal electorate to support the ANC". He gave Mtolo the ultimatum of apologising within two days or the labour organisation would go to court. Mtolo said Nehawu leaders could "go jump [off] ... the nearest cliff". "They can bully other unions in Cosatu, and they are bullying Samwu [the South African Municipal Workers' Union] and Sadtu [the South African Democratic Teachers Union]. They chased Numsa [the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa] away from Cosatu, the most powerful industrial union, but they must know they can't bully everyone." Mtolo also accused Nehawu of abandoning workers in the security, textile and retail industries.