The Section 154 invocation by the provincial government in the eThekwini metro is back on the table. Two experienced bureaucrats will assist in the running of the municipality. Last year, ANC councillors blocked the team, but now the IFP-led Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs is pushing through with the process. KwaZulu-Natal Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) MEC Thulasizwe Buthelezi has finally introduced the Section 154 team that will administer the regimen for troubled municipalities, including eThekwini Municipality. Section 154 allows the national government "to support and strengthen" municipalities' capacity to handle their affairs and perform their functions. The Section 154 intervention will be led by Michael Sutcliffe and Cassius Lubisi. Last year, ANC councillors blocked the process, with one insider telling News24 at the time: "We were surprised by the announcement. The municipality had already been receiving support from the Department of Water and Sanitation, but this wasn't announced. You have to ask yourself why this was announced when the other government support wasn't announced." Cogta now falls under the IFP as a result of the government of national unity (GNU) arrangement. READ | Section 154 'announcement' questioned by some eThekwini councillors On Thursday, Buthelezi addressed the executive committee, where he told councillors: "Our aim is to restore eThekwini to its former status as the jewel in the crown of KwaZulu-Natal." Buthelezi said the move underscored the commitment to clean governance and accelerated service delivery by the seventh administration. According to Buthelezi, the Section 154 "strategic support" entails: Building a clean, effective, efficient, responsive and accountable local government; Implementation of findings of investigation reports; Addressing non-compliance with terms and conditions, including poor spending on allocated grants for various projects; and Strengthening partnerships between communities, civil society, the business sector and other critical role-players to restore public and investor confidence. "The appointed team will provide monthly reports to the MEC and will be in operation for 12 months starting from 1 July 2024," Buthelezi's office said.