The ANC's Cyril Xaba was elected unopposed as the eThekwini mayor on Wednesday morning. Xaba, who has taken over from Mxolisi Kaunda, has committed to accelerating service delivery and attracting investment. ANC provincial secretary Bheki Mtolo says Xaba is the right man to lead the City's reconfiguration and resuscitate business confidence and tourism in eThekwini. Newly elected eThekwini Mayor, Cyril Xaba, a seasoned politician who once served as MEC for Agriculture and Rural Development in KwaZulu-Natal, has devised a cocktail of measures to restore the metro to its former glory. Speaking shortly after taking over the mayoral chain on Wednesday, Xaba promised to collaborate with amakhosi, business and religious leaders, as well as academia to solicit their input on how to give the city a much-needed facelift. He said: "We urge residents and businesses to play their role by disposing of waste in designated areas. In the next few days, we will be meeting with all service delivery units to streamline our plans to clean the city, rehabilitate our roads, fix street lights, maintain our sports facilities and parks, build houses, and deal with water and sewer leakages." Xaba replaces Mxolisi Kaunda, who was shown the door last month after a string of governance and political failures during his tenure as eThekwini mayor. READ | eThekwini mayoral squabbles: ANC dismisses speculations Cyril Xaba will be sworn in as 'rumours' The new mayor in the IFP-led provincial government of unity has a mammoth task in turning around the city's fortunes. eThekwini was once an attractive tourist destination in KwaZulu-Natal. Xaba said his engagements with various stakeholders will assist the city to develop new approaches to accelerate service delivery. He added: "We will engage amakhosi, political parties, business, community-organised labour, civil society, the religious sector, and academia to solicit their input on how we can move the city forward. I assure you of my total commitment to collaborate with all political parties and stakeholders to make this city work for its residents." Xaba said the city will double its efforts in creating a safe and cleaner environment for the people of eThekwini. "We are determined to improve collaboration with all law enforcement agencies, including the SAPS, to curb crime. We must also endeavour to adequately resource our Metro Police so that their presence is felt in the city. "Over and above the number of Metro Police personnel, we must invest in smart policing using technology such as CCTV cameras to prevent crime," he added. The new mayor reminded residents that fighting crime was a collective responsibility." Newly elected eThekwini Mayor, Councillor Cyril Xaba, takes oath of office soon after he was elected unopposed. pic.twitter.com/PV9VUddqOw — eThekwini Municipality (@eThekwiniM) July 10, 2024 Xaba said the City will also insist that people refrain from building in flood-prone areas, as it looks for suitable land to build houses. ANC provincial secretary, Bheki Mtolo, said Xaba was elected unopposed. "We have no doubt that his election will usher in a new era of accelerated service delivery for the benefit of residents and the business community in all corners of the City," said Mtolo. In a statement released on Wednesday, he said Xaba was the right man to lead the reconfiguration of the city and resuscitate business confidence and tourism in eThekwini. Mtolo said Xaba also chaired the Portfolio Committee on Defence in Parliament. "Armed with this experience, Mayor Cyril Xaba will strengthen good, clean governance. He will ensure a strong focus on caring and responsive service delivery for the benefit of residents. He understands that all political parties in the city represent the aspirations of the people," he said, praising Xaba. READ | COALITION NATION: IFP denies involvement in ANC's decision to recall eThekwini mayor Mxolisi Kaunda Mtolo said all political parties in the provincial government of unity would cooperate to ensure the reconfiguration of the municipal committees. According to a News24 report, the seasoned politician has been a political head in organisations including the Congress of South African Students (Cosas), the University of Natal Black Students' Society, the ANC Youth League (ANCYL), the ANC regional executive committee, and the ANC provincial executive committee. Kaunda, who is now a member of the National Council of Provinces, had been mayor since 2019 and was often criticised for failing to improve service delivery in the coastal city. His tenure was characterised by a sewage spill onto the beaches, which was so bad that the beaches were declared unsafe for swimming.