The IFP and the ANC have the same number of seats in the uMzumbe Local Municipality - with 17 each. The one other council seat is occupied by a former senior ANC politician, Sibonelo Maphumulo, who defected to the MK Party. The IFP and the ANC struck a deal that left the MK Party powerless in that council. A power-sharing deal between the IFP and the ANC has isolated the MK Party in the uMzumbe Local Municipality on the south coast of KwaZulu-Natal. The IFP and the ANC found themselves with 17 seats apiece in the council after last month's by-election, which came as a result of seven ANC councillors being suspended and four defections to the MK Party. The MK Party holds the other one seat, which was won by the most recent ANC speaker there, Sibonelo Maphumulo, who defected to MKP. Maphumulo and six other ANC councillors led a mutiny that ended in their resignations, with four of the councillors defecting to former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party. READ | Mutiny stifles ANC's last light in KZN by-elections, IFP breathes new life with 3 new wards However, all those councillors lost their jobs except the now-isolated Maphumulo, who is now an ordinary councillor with limited powers. Meanwhile, in a letter dated 16 July, ANC provincial secretary Bheki Mtolo essentially demoted ANC deputy mayor Mhlengi Luthuli. The move was to accommodate the ANC's government of provincial unity partner, the IFP, which boasts an equal number of seats as the ANC in uMzumbe. The ANC's only other option would have been to work with Zuma's first and only councillor in KwaZulu-Natal, Maphumulo. Writing to Luthuli, Mtolo reminded him that the ANC had "lost its majority" in last month's by-elections in uMzumbe. In part, Mtolo's letter read: The ANC is no longer a majority party [in uMzumbe], which means the ANC must work with the other parties to govern. As the ANC leadership, we have engaged the IFP and agreed to work together and form a government that will serve the people of uMzumbe. Under the agreement, the ANC will hold the positions of mayor, council chief whip, and municipal public accounts committee chairperson, with the IFP holding the speaker and deputy mayor roles. Mtolo asked Luthuli to resign by Tuesday afternoon. In a recent interview with News24, Maphumulo said the ANC was "the biggest loser" in the equation "because they've lost a ward", adding that "that's what matters the most. The ward was in their hands, and now it's in the hands of the MKP". READ | GPU tension in KZN: ANC accuses IFP leader of Cogta of abusing office, IFP calls ANC leaders corrupt On Thursday, Maphumulo said the MK Party would do its best to serve its people despite limited powers. He said he was astounded that the IFP, "which went to the extremes of closing council doors and fighting the ANC" in the last administration, would now work with the ANC.