The National Health Insurance remains a sticking point for parties in the government of national unity. According to DA leader and Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen, some of the aspects of the act are problematic. But to avoid lengthy court challenges, the party hopes to iron out issues within the Cabinet. The 11 political parties in the government of national unity (GNU) have not yet found common ground on how to proceed with the controversial National Health Insurance (NHI), DA leader John Steenhuisen has said. The opposition party leader, who is now also the agriculture minister, was nevertheless upbeat about the new GNU - a collaborative government negotiated between 11 political parties and the ANC in the aftermath of the party's 17-point decline in support and loss of its outright majority in the 2024 national and provincial elections. While the air is filled with positivity, there remain some sticking points around which the 11 parties cannot agree on. One of these is the NHI. "The NHI Bill is a sticking point, and it has been a sticking point on the issues around the negotiation of the statement of intent. It also has been a subject matter that has come up for discussion. "I would say this, there's no single party that is part of the GNU that does not fundamentally believe we have to have universal access to basic health care and that we have to do something to improve the quality of care for every South African citizen, but particularly to ensure that nobody is deprived of good medical assistance based on their income," Steenhuisen said. READ | Step away from that pen: Minister Gwarube will ask Ramaphosa to send BELA Bill back to Parliament On Wednesday, he addressed a press briefing to outline the party's expectations ahead of the Opening of Parliament Address. According to Steenhuisen, all parties agreed on the need for universal healthcare. "I think where there are differences is on the funding model. I think around the issue of choice and where are we going to be making a very strong pitch that instead of us tying up the NHI with decades of constitutional challenges and the like, are there ways that we could look at that particular bill to achieve the outcomes that I believe we all want - universal access to basic health care in a way that doesn't deprive people simply because they can't afford it." Steenhuisen said he believed the NHI Act could be tweaked and there should be discussions to start implementations that can move towards improving the public healthcare sector and partnering with the private health care sector. "It's my view that the NHI in its current form will frustrate universal access to basic health care for at least a generation. "I think that there are some areas where the bill can be amended or change or the approach and regulations can be changed to reintroduce choice to treat the private sector as a partner in fixing the public healthcare sector," he added. “After 20 years as the official opposition in SA's democratic dispensation, the DA has stepped into a new role as the second-largest political party in the Government of National Unity (GNU), where no single political party won an outright majority in the 2024 General Election.”… pic.twitter.com/xo2w0zKbaw — Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) July 17, 2024 President Cyril Ramaphosa signed the NHI Act into law ahead of the 29 May general elections, amid criticism and threats of legal action from various parties, healthcare organisations and business groups. Critics argue the act, as it stands, is unconstitutional, unworkable, unaffordable and would hinder access to quality public healthcare. Even the ANC's partner in the GNU, the DA, opposes the NHI Act, with Steenhuisen pledging in May to challenge the legislation in the Constitutional Court. But since being in government, he has adopted a more pragmatic approach. "I think that we can find each other as the parties in the GNU. I think we all want the same thing; we just have slightly different ideas about how we're going to get there. So that will be an ongoing discussion within the GNU as we proceed," Steenhuisen said.