The seventh Parliament is officially open. Cyril Ramaphosa outlined the GNU's plan for the next five years. Here are nine essential points from his address on Thursday night. With the government of national unity (GNU) in full swing, and Parliament officially opened, here are nine key points News24 extracted from President Cyril Ramaphosa's address. 1. The seventh administration will focus on three strategic priorities - inclusive growth and job creation; reducing poverty and tackling the high cost of living; and building a capable, ethical and developmental state. 2. These strategic priorities arose from a "minimum programme", which was developed at a recent Cabinet lekgotla. The minimum programme was agreed to by the government of national unity (GNU), which includes the DA, PA, GOOD and the PAC. 3. Ramaphosa emphasised the unity of the GNU, which is set to run SA for the duration of the seventh administration. 4. An immediate priority would be to stabilise governance in metros and restore the delivery of services at municipal level. Ramaphosa vowed to return the eThekwini Metro to its former glory. His pronouncement came just two years before the next local government election in 2026. 5. Ramaphosa said the GNU would intensify investment in infrastructure, turn SA into a construction site over the next five years, and drive growth in labour-intensive sectors. He also emphasised maintaining existing infrastructure. 6. The GNU will reduce the high cost of living through expanding the basket of essential food items exempt from VAT, and undertake a comprehensive review of administered prices, including the fuel price formula, to identify areas where prices can be reduced. 7. On the implementation of the National Health Insurance (NHI), Ramaphosa said: "While there is much contestation around the NHI, there is broad agreement that we must draw on the resources and capabilities of both the public and private sectors to meet the healthcare needs of all South Africans equally." 8. The seventh administration will deploy modern technology to assist in crime fighting. A data-driven approach will be used to identify violent crime hotspots and inform the allocation of policing resources alongside prevention measures. 9. Ramaphosa said he would convene a "national dialogue" with all sectors of society, including business, labour, the religious sector, non-governmental organisations and traditional leaders, to discuss the critical challenges facing SA, and to agree on what we all need to do to achieve a better future.