IFP president Velenkosini Hlabisa has urged the DA and ANC to conclude their government of national unity (GNU) negotiations. Talks to form a GNU entered a third week as ANC and DA negotiators locked horns over Cabinet positions. ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa and DA leader John Steenhuisen met on Friday afternoon to iron out their differences following an impasse in the talks. IFP president Velenkosini Hlabisa has broken his silence on the shaky start to the formation of the government of national unity (GNU), saying the DA and the ANC must conclude their negotiations without further delay. "It is essential the president, as the Constitution allows him, be able to reach the stage of announcing the new Cabinet. The IFP is thus calling on the ANC, the DA, and any other party to conclude the outstanding issues between them without further delay," Hlabisa said on Friday. Briefing the media on the uncertainty in the establishment of the GNU from the party's headquarters in Durban after its national executive committee meeting, Hlabisa said the IFP was not immediately concerned when "alarmist reports began to emerge of a potential stalemate". He added: There was, as far as we could see, no crisis. We understood that there will be necessary teething problems in the formation of a government of national unity. Hlabisa's comments come amid delays in the announcement of the Cabinet fuelled by disagreements between the ANC and the DA. Negotiations are now in their third week as parties struggle to find each other. While it is Ramaphosa's prerogative to announce who he wants in Cabinet positions, Hlabisa said he had full confidence in both Ramaphosa and DA leader John Steenhuisen, who met again on Friday afternoon. The two leaders met to mend relations after the ANC withdrew the post of trade and industry, which it had initially agreed to offer to the DA. Hlabisa added while certain ministries took precedence over others, "there's no position" more important than the other. He said South Africans were not concerned about the squabbles for power and positions but about service delivery. "Agreements must be reached on a win-win that enables South Africa to move forward. In the service of our country, it is necessary for us all to put our own interests aside, electing rather to serve the common good," added Hlabisa. READ | COALITION NATION: 'Take it or leave it': Ramaphosa presents final offers to GNU partners "All stakeholders should bear in mind that the country can't be kept in a stalemate for too long. We agree that we shouldn't make quick decisions, but it is a little bit longer now, and other provinces are at work." His tone signalled the IFP was slowly losing patience with its GNU partners. Hlabisa added: The IFP is of the view that whoever is involved should finalise the issues and the president accordingly use the prerogative that is granted to him by our Constitution. We know that it is not going to be a willy-nilly, and he won't just appoint anyone, but he is engaging, and the engagements should not go on endlessly. He said the IFP entered the GNU fully aware it was going to be a "give-and-take" situation and that in coalition governments, "you do not come with fixed positions". "You advance how you feel that things should be, and you engage up to a point where you say that let's get a common ground. "The IFP is happy on its side on the engagements, and we know that the next five years are going to be a period of engagement. It should be a win-win situation, not winning and others losing," Hlabisa added. READ | Why KZN's new premier has taken control of the community safety portfolio IFP MP Narend Singh said the impact of the president not announcing his Cabinet was having a ripple effect on the legislative arm as well. "Yesterday [Thursday] and today [Friday], we were engaged in meetings talking about portfolio committees and other committees that need to be elected at the legislature level as well, so the delay causes that kind of lacuna as well. So, the quicker the president announces, the easier it is for Parliament to continue functioning." Earlier this month, the IFP, which has been cozying up to the ANC, announced its decision to join the GNU with the former ruling party and DA. Hlabisa also announced the IFP would form a coalition government with the ANC, DA, and NFP in KwaZulu-Natal. The IFP's Thami Ntuli has since been sworn in as the premier of the province, and a provincial cabinet has been formed. READ | COALITION NATION: Ramaphosa slams 'jockeying for positions', tussles, squabbles between GNU parties This relationship led to former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party being ejected from power despite receiving the most votes in the general elections on 29 May. Ten political parties have since joined the GNU following an invitation earlier this month. The IFP also served in a GNU from 1994 to 1999 after South Africa's first democratic election. The last time South Africa had a GNU was under Nelson Mandela in 1994, when he appointed FW de Klerk as a deputy president and 10 ministers from the National Party and IFP. The IFP also co-governed with the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal from 1999 to 2004.