Cyril Ramaphosa lauded the GNU's first Cabinet lekgotla. He said the executive had reached consensus on various issues. Ramaphosa will outline the GNU's priorities in Parliament on Thursday. When President Cyril Ramaphosa delivers his Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday, he will outline the key priorities agreed upon by the government of national unity (GNU) after an "inspiring and task-focused" Cabinet lekgotla at the weekend. Ramaphosa will set the tone for the next five years as he champions a tricky negotiated settlement following the ANC's abysmal showing at the May general elections. The lekgotla took place at the Sefako Makgatho Presidential Guest House in Pretoria on Saturday and Sunday. Speaking to the SABC after the Climate Resilience Symposium in Johannesburg on Monday, Ramaphosa said his ministers would now work to deliver on the priorities set out in the statement of intent. He said: "All the people from various political parties felt that it was the very best Cabinet lekgotla and strategy session that they had ever been to because there was great synergy, and there was no dissenting voice." The president said various issues were discussed, including the economy, cushioning the poor, and putting South Africans first. Ramaphosa said: "We found that we had a common purpose. We were unified in our message, intent, and commitment to take South Africa forward. So, the statement of intent that political parties signed is the glue that holds us all together." The Constitution, which all South Africans subscribe to, will underpin the unity in the executive, the president said. "There are values, principles and so, therefore, we combined around that and started plotting out what needs to be done to advance the lives people of South Africa in accordance with our priorities set out in the statement of intent. "When I open Parliament, I will be outlining precisely the issues that we have arrived at. There was unanimity on everything. It was an extremely wonderful Cabinet lekgotla," added Ramaphosa. READ | Nuclear deal: Ramokgopa promises transparency, doesn't want 'process to be soiled or discredited' Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya said the lekgotla was "very inspiring and task-focused". "The spirit of unity and commitment to the GNU and, more importantly, to taking the country forward was quite palpable throughout the room and over the two days of the lekgotla," said Magwenya. He told News24 that Cabinet members exuded a positive energy, and there had been frank and constructive engagements. "Ministers, premiers and deputy ministers engaged as members of one national executive, under one government, serving all South Africans. The camaraderie and even the bit of banter at times was great to witness. "All members of the national executive are clear on what they have to do, and they've been properly inducted. The focus was on moving forward with an aligned set of priorities," Magwenya said. He added that the statement of intent had been aligned with the National Development Plan and Sustainable Development Goals. More detailed implementation plans will be finalised in clusters, said Magwenya. READ | Cogta boss cracks whip – will dissolve dysfunctional municipalities to stabilise local government At the weekend, several ministers highlighted their priorities. Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Velenkosini Hlabisa told the media his aim was to improve service delivery at a local government sphere. Hlabisa vowed to dissolve poor-performing municipalities and significantly reduce service delivery protests. Trade, Industry and Competition Minister Parks Tau said Pretoria would use the upcoming African Growth and Opportunity Act Summit in Washington to engage US lawmakers on the intention to review bilateral ties with South Africa. Electricity and Energy Minister, Kgosientsho Ramokgopa, speaks to the media on the sidelines of the first Cabinet Lekgotla at the Sefako Makgatho Presidential Guest House in Pretoria. @News24 pic.twitter.com/DoFsVF2Xxl — Amanda Khoza - The Journalist (@MandaKhoza) July 13, 2024 Electricity and Energy Minister Kgosientsho Ramokgopa reaffirmed the government's commitment to transparency and accountability in developing a framework for the procurement of nuclear energy in South Africa. Ramokgopa said the government was forging ahead with procuring nuclear energy to keep the lights on. Human Settlements Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi said her department would meet with Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana to find mechanisms to better respond to disasters in South Africa. Hundreds of people had to be relocated to temporary shelters after they lost their homes as gale-force winds, heavy rainfall and flooding persisted in the Western Cape last week.