Pemmy Majodina's key priority is the water mafias. The minister won't tolerate people being deprived of their constitutional right to access water. Majodina will meet with the Lesotho government to fast-track the completion of phase two of the Lesotho Highlands water project. Water and Sanitation Minister Pemmy Majodina has declared war on "mafias" who capitalise on South Africa's water crisis. Majodina said she would not tolerate those who deprived citizens of their constitutional right to access water. "What we have requested Cabinet to do is that all the water reservoirs and projects must be treated as national key points and be protected, like Parliament and the Union Buildings, because we cannot allow people to be frog-jumped by mafias who want extortion and protection fees. That is not on. Our people need water," Majodina said. Majodina said she wanted such cases to be treated seriously because "no one can deny people water". The minister said she was aware of acts of sabotage and man-made crises during which people want to benefit financially. "As long as we have strong monitoring tools, starting from municipalities, because some officials make sure that they don't attend to water leakages... so we can have water trucks [tankers], but who benefits from those water trucks? Those water trucks are not sustainable. They eat into the budgets of the municipalities," she said. READ | SA water crisis: New minister Pemmy Majodina looks to private sector to fix crumbling infrastructure According to Majodina, more water will be made available to South Africans via underground water resources. "We want to make it clear that there is no one who must block people from getting water. Those private farms always block people and don't allow people to get water. No one can deny a person a right to access water - that is enshrined in Section 27 of the Constitution, read with Section 56," said Majodina. In March, News24 reported that, in Vryburg, residents described what was said to be a "man-made" crisis, which left thousands of people without water for months. In his Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday, President Cyril Ramaphosa highlighted South Africa's water challenges. He said: "South Africa is a water-scarce country, and our water security is threatened by historical under-investment in bulk water resources and distribution infrastructure. "We will, therefore, continue with institutional reforms in the water sector to enable greater investment in bulk water infrastructure and better regulation of water services across the country." The president said in the same way businesses needed water and electricity to operate, a growing economy needed skills. "We will ensure schools are conducive to education, with enough classrooms, safe and appropriate sanitation facilities, clean water, and a daily meal for those who need it," said Ramaphosa. Unveiling her plans to deal with the water crisis, Majodina said the department of water and sanitation recently tabled a R164 billion budget, and the department would intervene and unblock projects like the Lesotho Highlands. She said: "Remember, phase two of the Lesotho Highlands is going to give water to Gauteng, Free State, Mpumalanga and North West. In the next three or four weeks, I will be with the Lesotho government to ensure we fast-track this. "There is a notorious Giyane project that has been under investigation by the SIU [Special Investigating Unit], and we have said, while the SIU is still investigating, let our people not suffer because they need water. "We are intervening in Hammanskraal. Phase one of the Hammanskraal project will be handed over in October. We are also intervening in Johannesburg... there is a lot of water wastage in Johannesburg." READ | ON THE ROAD: Tinker Tanker Tender Dry: Residents say Vryburg water shortage is a man-made crisis In terms of international standards, Majodina said citizens were supposed to use 173 litres per capita per day but, in South Africa, 298 litres a day was used. "There is water that is not accounted for, and municipalities are unable to raise revenue because of water leaks," she said. Majodina committed to working closely with municipalities to upgrade and build water infrastructure. She said: The challenge with Johannesburg is that they do not have water reservoirs, so when there is load shedding, they cannot have water that is kept in the reservoirs, so we must increase their reservoirs. What we have agreed on now is that we are not building new dams... ours is to regulate water. Majodina said her department would be launching water associations. "People must use water sparingly in South Africa because we are one of 30 countries that is water scarce... but how we use water, I think we need to do more awareness." On improving water quality, Majodina said it must be drinkable in all areas in South Africa. "That is why we have used the tool of the blue and green drop. Currently, our blue drop is decreasing because water is polluted, so we are going to charge those who are polluting water, like the mining sector. I am happy that the mining sector has partnered with us in the Northern Cape to ensure that mines don't pollute water. "What we saw in Hammanskraal was just not on. What I can say is that we do have water for the next 30 years. Provided that we use it sparingly, we are not going to run out of water," she said. Majodina said the deaths from cholera in Hammanskraal were due to leadership failures.