The Department of Correctional Services will receive a baseline budget cut of just over R2.5 billion over the medium term. In his budget vote speech, Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald said this cut would severely impact the department. He said "Oom Pieter" - himself - wouldn't be able to overcome this alone and emphasised working together. Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald is concerned about the impact of budget cuts on the department he now leads, which could include adverse influence on the monitoring of parolees. Groenewald, the FF Plus leader, delivered his first budget vote speech to a mini-plenary of the National Assembly on Monday. He said the department's main task in the current financial year was to build on interventions to make correctional facilities safe and secure. He also offered a frank assessment of the challenges facing the department. "We need to identify and acknowledge the problems facing correctional services. We need to prioritise addressing the areas of inefficiency in the department and root out corruption, ill-discipline and restore effective service delivery and create a system that not only corrects, but heals, educates, reintegrates and contributes to the eradication of crime. "These challenges include overcrowding, dilapidated facilities, ever-decreasing remand detainees, deteriorating infrastructure, staff shortages, crime syndicates and gangs operating in our facilities, and new forms of crime patterns challenging our rehabilitation programmes." READ | Hope and challenges: Pieter Groenewald's appointment sparks expectations among inmates and unions The department's total budget over the medium-term expenditure framework is R87.1 billion, representing a baseline budget cut of R2.525 billion. Groenewald said: The impact of these cuts is severe. "The provision of security equipment is compromised; capital investment in skills developments was cut; the budget for nutritional services had to be cut; capital works projects will be on hold; and the monitoring of parolees could be negatively impacted. "We will and have to do more with less. This will require innovation, discipline and commitment." Groenewald said: "Agbare voorsitter, Oom Pieter sal nie alleen sukses kan bereik nie, ons sal moet saamwerk [Honourable chairperson, Uncle Pieter won't achieve success alone, we'll have to work together]." He said South Africa was in an exciting, but complex time. "The success of the new administration is dependent on our commitment. We have been afforded the opportunity to bring about real change to the lives of ordinary South Africans. We have been afforded the opportunity to restore and build, to fix what is broken, and to render hope for a safe, peaceful and prosperous future." He noted that the world would commemorate Nelson Mandela Day on Thursday. "President Mandela said: 'Crime must be brought under control... Freedom without civility, freedom without the ability to live in peace, is not true freedom at all.'" Rapist and murderer Thabo Bester escaped from Mangaung Correctional Centre in a high-profile case that led to calls for critical measures to be taken in the Department of Correctional Services. (Mlungisi Louw/Gallo Images/Volksblad) Gallo Images He said all communities in South Africa were affected by high levels of violent crime, while the courts were underfunded and the jails overfilled. He said it was the most vulnerable in society, women and children, who bear the brunt of it. "The Department of Correctional Services is paramount in our fight against crime and realising a South Africa of peace and prosperity for all. The department has the important task to safeguard communities against convicted criminals whilst providing rehabilitation of offenders in order to ensure safe reintegration into society." Groenewald said that by instilling discipline; fostering mutual respect; rooting out fraud and corruption; ensuring that there is consequence management; and investing in rehabilitation, education and restorative justice, "we can create a system that not only corrects but heals." "We have to work together, thank you," he concluded. Several MPs participating in the debate expressed concern about corruption at correctional facilities and that inmates have access to items like cellphones. The MKP and EFF indicated that they would not support the budget.