South Africa's "principled solidarity with peoples burdened under the yoke of oppression will not waver", President Cyril Ramaphosa said. He was responding to the debate on his Opening of Parliament Address, where he was criticised for not saying much on foreign policy. South Africa would also continue to push for reform on international bodies like the UN Security Council. South Africa's "principled solidarity with peoples burdened under the yoke of oppression will not waver", President Cyril Ramaphosa said as he expanded on the government of national unity's (GNU) foreign policy. During his Opening of Parliament Address (OPA) on Thursday evening, Ramaphosa did not say much about international relations. "As we strengthen economic diplomacy with our largest trading partners and potential trading partners, we will prioritise the implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area [AfCFTA] to increase our exports to the rest of the continent," he said. "We will do this as part of our foreign policy approach, which promotes peace, security, democracy and development across Africa and advances a more just and inclusive world order." This did not go unnoticed when both Houses of Parliament on Friday debated OPA, with EFF leader Julius Malema saying Ramaphosa did not speak about international relations and ignored Israel's continued attacks on Palestinians in Gaza, because GNU-partner the DA, "loves the Zionists". ACDP MP Wayne Thring said the government took a hypocritical position on the Israel/Palestine conflict. The ACDP is staunchly on the side of Israel. Al Jamah-ah leader and Deputy Social Development Minister Ganief Hendricks expressed his support of Palestine and said leaders around the world should unite to stop the Zionist state of Israel. Al Jamah-ah is part of the GNU, the ACDP is not. READ | OPA debate: GNU parties warn against populism, attacks on the Constitution On Monday, Ramaphosa responded to the debate in a joint sitting of Parliament. He said his administration remained committed to a foreign relations policy and outlook that prioritised the achievement of the African Union's (AU) Agenda 2063. "Agenda 2063 is Africa's blueprint and master plan for transforming Africa into the global powerhouse of the future. "It is the continent's strategic framework that aims to deliver on its goal for inclusive and sustainable development and is a concrete manifestation of the pan-African drive for unity, self-determination, freedom, progress and collective prosperity pursued under Pan-Africanism and African Renaissance," read the AU's website. Said Ramaphosa: "Honourable Malema, South Africa's role on the continent and across the world remains firmly on our agenda. We see the African Continental Free Trade Area and other instruments of continental economic integration as vital to our own economic fortunes." The President said that the #7thAdministration remains committed to a foreign relations policy and outlook that prioritises the achievement of the @_AfricanUnion's Agenda 2063. "Honourable Malema, South Africa's role on the Continent and across the world remains firmly on our… pic.twitter.com/JyJw9Qi98m — Parliament of RSA (@ParliamentofRSA) July 22, 2024 January this year, he added, saw South Africa's first shipment of products to other African countries under the AfCFTA . "We are extremely encouraged by the potential the AfCFTA presents in terms of new markets for South African goods, products and services. We welcome the progress being made towards finalising rules of origin, and towards a Pan-African payment and settlement system," Ramaphosa said. He agreed with Trade, Industry and Competition Minister Parks Tau that "AfCFTA, is a game-changing initiative to leverage one of the fastest-growing consumer markets in the world, a growing market that is young, tech-savvy, highly educated and conscientious about implementing actionable Pan-Africanism for the 21st century". "As South Africa, we are committed to silencing the guns on the continent and to playing our part in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in Africa. "We have deployed members of the South African National Defence Force to support UN, AU and SADC peacekeeping missions in several parts of the continent," Ramaphosa said. "They have served not only their country, but also their continent, with diligence and courage. "We once again pay tribute to the soldiers who have lost their lives during operations in the DRC [Democratic Republic of the Congo] and Mozambique and also in our own country. "Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of our soldiers, and we salute their bravery and sacrifice in the cause of peace in one of the world's most troubled regions." Ramaphosa said they continued "to make every effort to ensure the safety and wellbeing of our troops and the police". "Our principled solidarity with peoples burdened under the yoke of oppression will not waver. We stand in solidarity with the peoples of Western Sahara and Palestine, and we continue to support Cuba as well." READ MORE | Israel is violating anti-apartheid convention, must get out of Palestinian territory - ICJ Ramaphosa noted on Friday, while Parliament was debating, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) issued an advisory opinion that Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian land and the construction of settlements in the West Bank was illegal under international law. "The court said this should come to an end as rapidly as possible. And we also reiterate that the occupation of Gaza and the West Bank must come to an end so that the Palestinians must have self-determination. "Now, this is a separate case to the one launched by South Africa at the International Court of Justice last year in response to the genocide being perpetrated against the people of Gaza. "What this latest ruling indicates is that international momentum against Israel's continued violations of the rights of the Palestinian people is growing." He said he would meet South Africa's team to the ICJ after the debate. "Just as our own struggle for national liberation was eventually won with steady victories, so too will the quest for Palestinian statehood be ultimately realised." Ramaphosa added they would continue to pursue progressive internationalism and advance principled solidarity. "Our own history and experience demands no less of us." He said South Africa would continue to push the for reform of global governance institutions, including the UN Security Council, to give a greater voice to developing countries. "We will continue to push for the international financial institutions and the multilateral development banks to be reformed and representative and to provide greater financial and technical support to developing countries to meet their most pressing needs." Ramaphosa added South Africa was preparing to host next year's G20 Summit. "We are pleased that our campaign to include the African Union as a member of the G20 was successful," he said. "This is an important platform to advance the interests of Africa and other countries of the Global South, and to mobilise support for a more just and equal world order." According to Ramaphosa, South Africa played an instrumental role in the expansion of BRICS last year and this presented favourable trade and investment opportunities. South Africa would also continue to urge developed economies to meet their responsibilities and obligations to developing economies to provide support for climate change adaptation and mitigation, in line with their commitments under the Paris Agreement, he said. "As the government of national unity, we will continuously pursue a foreign policy based on the national interest, our country's economic objectives, and in furtherance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all." Ramaphosa did not speak about Russia's continued offensive in Ukraine.