President Cyril Ramaphosa responded to the debate on his Opening of Parliament Address on Monday, reiterating the government of national unity's commitment to non-racialism and the Constitution. He said the "name-calling, race-baiting and ethnic chauvinism" displayed by the so-called progressive caucus during the debate was unfortunate. Ramaphosa recommended that EFF leader Julius Malema read some books about South African politics. President Cyril Ramaphosa hit back at the "name-calling, race-baiting and ethnic chauvinism" that the so-called progressive forum - which includes the EFF and MK Party (MKP) - displayed during the debate on his Opening of Parliament Address, and he has confirmed the government's commitment to non-racialism and the Constitution. During the debate, the so-called progressive caucus advanced the notion that the ANC had sold out by working with the "oppressor", the DA, in the government of national unity (GNU). MKP leader in Parliament, and the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, John Hlophe said: "The establishment of the government of national unity is singularly a very cruel joke by the Ramaphosa faction of the ANC and the Democratic Alliance perpetuated against the oppressed and downtrodden masses of our people." "My question to you, president, is this: Through what magic do you hope to forge a national unity of the oppressor and the oppressed? The exploiter and the exploited? The rich capitalist and the exploited and toiling working class?" Hlophe asked. EFF leader Julius Malema said to Ramaphosa: "In the battle against neo-colonialism, you chose the side of the oppressor. "You boldly take this counter-revolutionary decision because you know you have the protection of white capital." READ | OPA debate: GNU parties warn against populism, attacks on the Constitution On Monday, Ramaphosa responded to the debate, saying: "We must not allow our work to be derailed by sowers of disunity." "The name-calling, race-baiting and ethnic chauvinism we have seen in the course of this debate has been regrettable," he added. He said PA leader Gayton McKenzie, who is the Minister of Sport, Arts and Culture, challenged the government and society to "address the national question". "This is vital if we are to proceed to build a united nation. Not only do we need to have frank and honest conversations about how race continues to define the prospects of our people, but we need to pursue policies that resolve these contradictions in our economy and society. "The Honourable [ANC MP] Sangoni Diko was clear in saying non-racialism is fundamental to the struggle for a free and equal society. Non-racialism is not a concession. It is not an act of charity. "It is something that we must continue to build so that we can achieve a South Africa that truly belongs to all who live in it. The task of building a non-racial and a non-sexist society requires that we remove the material barriers that apartheid created to divide South Africans. That is why we have placed the task of inclusive growth and job creation at the centre of the work of this administration. "That is why we have stressed the relationship between growth and transformation. To undertake the necessary redistribution of wealth and opportunity, we need an economy that grows." ALSO READ | MKP, EFF's 'sell-out' narrative is 'opportunistic', says Fikile Mbalula He said to redistribute wealth and opportunity, a growing, thriving economy is needed. The MKP – which wasn't mentioned by Ramaphosa at all – wants to do away with the Constitution and implement parliamentary supremacy, and during the debate, Hlophe railed against Roman-Dutch law. "As parties to the government of national unity, we are in agreement on the importance of entrenching our constitutional democracy and the rule of law," he said. "We will continue to exert our every effort to safeguard the independence of the judiciary, freedom of the media and the work of the institutions supporting democracy." In the run-up to the election, MKP leader, corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma, made homophobic remarks. "South Africa is a beacon of hope and progress when it comes to the rights of the LGBTQI+ community. These are all important aspects of our human rights culture," Ramaphosa said. He also directly took on Malema – who claimed Ramaphosa's role in establishing the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) during apartheid was in service of white capital. Diverging from his prepared speech, Ramaphosa said in Sesotho that he wanted to sit down and talk about old politics with Malema because he could see he didn't understand it well. "I think you are confused. The next time you stand in front of us, I want to discuss things that will move us forward." "As we debate, we should play the ball, not the man. I would like you to read some books. Spend time speaking to Gwede Mantashe. He was a miner, and one of the first members of the NUM." He added that the NUM stopped the entire economy and mining industry of the country. "You call that a sellout position? In doing what you do, play the ball. Waar was jy? Waar was jy? (Where were you?)" Ramaphosa said two years ago, Malema insulted him, and his father, who was a police officer. "And yes, I am proud to have been a son of a policeman, a very good policeman." Ramaphosa said that didn't only offend him, but also his family. They should talk, he said, because his family is not happy. Ramaphosa conceded that the country still faced challenges and that the government had experienced "setbacks and shortcomings". "And yet we must remind ourselves that South Africa is not in the hopeless situation that some in the opposition benches want us to believe, and have sought to loudly assert with sound and fury during this debate. South Africa is a country that has come a long way over the past 30 years. Let us never lose sight of that." He said he took heed of the words of Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi, that "urgency is the currency of the times in which we now live". "Our government of national unity is therefore determined to rapidly scale up the pace of our efforts to bring development and shared prosperity to our people by working together. "And in this effort, as Minister [of Agriculture John] Steenhuisen says, we need the builders, not the breakers. We need weavers and not vultures. Those who share this vision of a better South Africa will find the doors of the government of national unity always open to cooperation and collaboration." READ MORE | Ramaphosa hails GNU as chance to make SA better, promises faster economic reforms In contrast to the so-called progressive caucus' divisive, racial rhetoric during the debate, the GNU partners emphasised unity. Ramaphosa embroidered further on that theme. "Much of what has been said during this debate has confirmed that we have entered a new era in South African politics. It is an era of hope and optimism for the people of our country. "We must demonstrate in word and deed that this is an era of a government of national unity and not a fleeting convenience. "We have had, and will continue to have, points of divergence, as the spirited nature of the debate has demonstrated. At the same time, we all understand what is expected of us by those who put us here. They expect us to chart this country towards the ultimate goal of a better life for all. Talking to each other and working together. Pulling in the same direction."