On Friday, both houses debated President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address he delivered on Thursday. Parties belonging to the GNU emphasised unity and working together. Staunch GNU opponents, the MKP and EFF, reacted with divisiveness and populism. While parties belonging to the government of national unity (GNU) emphasised working together to make progress for all South Africans and to be a bulwark against populism, the so-called progressive caucus reacted with divisiveness and populism, like doing away with Roman-Dutch law and expropriation without compensation. On Friday morning, ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli opened the debate on President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address the evening before. READ | Ramaphosa hails GNU as chance to make SA better, promises faster economic reforms "When people are faced with the threat of annihilation, they come together, seek one another to overcome their threat for their continued existence and to thrive," said Ntuli. "Our democratic breakthrough is under threat, and it is not business as usual. "As the ANC, we have invited our people to join in a reasoned and robust debate towards reconstruction and development of our country, rather than depending on charismatic populism which often defines our national discourse." He added that the ANC was "unwavering in its commitment to create a democratic, non-racial, non-sexist and prosperous South Africa in a peaceful world". Ntuli said the period between 2008 and 2022 had seen a "massive reversal of the strategic gains" that the ANC government had made since the advent of democracy, leading to the recent election results in which the party lost its outright majority. He said the ANC had resolved to forge unity among South Africa across race, religion and creed. "The gains of our democracy and freedom must be defended, consolidated and advanced to realise socio-economic rights as demanded by the Constitution of the Republic. We proceed from the understanding that our Constitution represents the will of our people and their desire for a better life for all," Ntuli said. ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli. (Darren Stewart/Gallo Images) He said forming a GNU was not a deviation from the national democratic revolution, but the fulfilment of its objective to build a united, non-racial society. Ntuli added that the GNU's vision was to address the needs of the people, "unlike coalitions that narrow their focus to political power management". MK Party leader in Parliament, and the first judge to be removed in a democratic South Africa, John Hlope said: "The establishment of the government of national unity is singularly a very cruel joke by the Ramaphosa faction of the ANC and the Democratic Alliance perpetuated against the oppressed and downtrodden masses of our people. "Our people are painfully aware that it would be impossible to create a united nation in South Africa unless the legacy of colonialism and apartheid was addressed." He recalled a speech by former president Thabo Mbeki in 1998 when he said South Africa was two nations – one prosperous and white, and another poor and black. "He uttered these words many years ago, and nothing has changed," said Hlophe, without mentioning that his party leader, corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma, was head of state for nine of the years since Mbeki made these remarks. Zuma attended the debate in the public gallery. MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe. (Jan Gerber/News24) "My question to you, president, is this: Through what magic do you hope to forge a national unity of the oppressor and the oppressed? The exploiter and the exploited? The rich capitalist and the exploited and toiling working class?" Hlophe asked He said the GNU was the ANC's desperate attempt to hold onto power after it could not achieve a majority, adding that many parties had said they would never work with the ANC. "But when they were offered blue lights, they suddenly fell in love with the ANC," said Hlophe, to the mirth of the MKP benches. He added: The MK Party was excluded in the sell-out GNU because we do not agree with the ANC and DA racists on many fronts. Without providing any substantiation, Hlophe claimed that the election was rigged against the MKP. MKP chief whip Sihle Ngubane also made unsubstantiated claims against the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC). He further advocated for the abolishment of Roman-Dutch law in South Africa, to be replaced with African law. He claimed Roman-Dutch law was used to protect the interests of colonisers and that the legal system was there to protect white privilege. The MKP, in its manifesto, has indicated that it wanted to replace South Africa's constitutionalism with Parliamentary supremacy. DA MP Glynnis Breytenbach said it was broadly accepted that there were two primary evils of the apartheid legal order: parliamentary supremacy and strict legal positivism. "Parliamentary supremacy in simple terms meant that Parliament could pass laws in an unconstrained manner, and those who applied the law had to give effect to these laws, irrespective of whether they believed it to be right or wrong," she said. She quoted former Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke, who said: "Under apartheid, Parliament enjoyed supremacy and no Constitution or bill of rights provided any fetter on its legislative powers." This allowed the regime to pass its oppressive laws. Breytenbach said other academic legal scholars had also analysed the damage caused by parliamentary supremacy. "In this regard, one such commentator remarked that it is essential that we should learn to say no to unwarranted parliamentary violations of human rights and advocated for the establishment of a true human rights culture in our country, arguing forcefully that to achieve this the rule of law must be strongly supported," she said. "This commentator is none other than Dr John Hlophe, in a learned article in the South African Law Journal of February 1995. "The very same Dr Hlophe who now proclaims that our legal system, the one transformed from an apartheid-enabling system to one founded on the rule of law and human rights, is nothing but a system imposed on us by our former colonisers and is, if not the problem, then at least part of the problem, in our country." Breytenbach said MKP's clearly stated goal was to "destroy our Constitution". "However, the drafters in their infinite wisdom gifted us with a safeguard that to break down constitutional supremacy and the rule of law requires the support of 75% of the members of the National Assembly," she added. "They did this because they realised that we needed a definitive break with parliamentary supremacy if our constitutional democracy is to withstand those who attempt to subvert it. This firewall we will work ceaselessly to protect." READ | Business 'encouraged' by Ramaphosa's NHI remarks, wants meeting with health minister PA leader and Sports, Arts and Culture Minister Gayton McKenzie said he was shocked to hear Hlophe's remarks about Roman-Dutch law, as the former judge had sent many of his friends to jail under this law. He offered to pay for appeals for everyone sentenced by Hlophe under a law he doesn't believe in. He also said while Hlophe spoke about blue lights, he didn't have a problem with Roman-Dutch law when he received the perks of a judge. The EFF followed a similar tack to the MKP, labelling the ANC as sell-outs for siding with the "oppressor". EFF leader Julius Malema said to Ramaphosa: "In the battle against neo-colonialism, you chose the side of the oppressor. "You boldly take this counter-revolutionary decision because you know you have the protection of white capital." EFF MP Virgil Gericke claimed, without any substantiation, that state machinery was used to eliminate political opponents. He said Ramaphosa took the offspring of the architects of apartheid into government, and only white people would benefit. EFF MP Naledi Chirwa reminded Ramaphosa of the Arab Spring and said the GNU would not be able to prevent it from happening in South Africa. EFF deputy leader Floyd Shivambu said they were opposed to the "so-called government of national unity". Instead, there should have been a revolutionary coalition government of parties whose "umbilical cords are buried in the same yard". Both opposition parties also called for an amendment to Section 25 of the Constitution to allow expropriation without compensation. Such an amendment failed during the previous term. DA leader and Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen said South Africa's potential had been held captive by political forces that sought to break down, rather than build up, for far too long. "Time and time again, they have used populist politics and racial rhetoric to break down any attempt at building consensus over the growth-enhancing reforms our economy so desperately needs," he said. "They have done so deliberately, because it is only by sowing division and preventing reform that they can keep institutions weak, keep the taps of corruption flowing, and stay out of jail over their many misdeeds." Steenhuisen said the GNU was South Africa's opportunity to free itself from populism, division and economic decline. He added: If this government of national unity succeeds in delivering on its apex priority of growing the economy and creating jobs, then the builders will defeat the breakers once and for all. "Let me tell your right now, the single greatest fear of the breakers in this House, is that the government of national unity succeeds in growing the economy and making South Africa a better place," he said. "The greatest fear of the breakers is not that South Africa fails. It would suit them just fine if our country goes up in smoke, because it would fuel the politics of division and destruction that they thrive on." Several other leaders belonging to GNU parties expressed the need for unity. McKenzie described the GNU as the best thing that had happened to South Africa, and that the only reason they were being called sell-outs was because the MKP and EFF "are not on the GNU train". IFP leader and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Velenkosini Hlabisa said his party was committed to ensuring the GNU's stability. FF Plus leader and Correctional Services Minister Pieter Groenewald said in Afrikaans: "We are all part of South Africa. If the ship sinks, we all go down." He said policies could not only be on paper. "We as government - and note I say we - have the responsibility to implement those policies." Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Minister Maropene Ramokgopa congratulated the members of the GNU for putting their differences aside. Electricity Minister Kgosientsho Ramokgopa said there was a "Malema oxymoron": it is acceptable for the EFF to enter into arrangements with the DA, but when the ANC does it, they get labelled. He concluded the debate by expressing his confidence that the GNU would deliver results for the people. Ramaphosa will respond on Monday. What they said: "We must respond to the outcry of our people that jobs are being taken by foreign nationals. It is the bottom end of the labour market that needs attention." - ANC chairperson Gwede Mantashe "We are all part of South Africa. If the ship sinks, we all go down." - FF Plus leader Pieter Groenewald "When President Mandela didn't want to make you president, you threw tantrums. I gave you the benefit of the doubt, thinking you were not a collaborator. In the battle against neo-colonialism, you chose the side of the oppressor." - EFF leader Julius Malema to President Cyril Ramaphosa "Your peers are delivering papers while you are being an iceboy here." - PA leader Gayton McKenzie to EFF MP Mbuyiseni Ndlozi - Jason Felix