Cyril Ramaphosa committed the GNU to "greater investment in bulk water infrastructure and better regulation of water services". He said the GNU would continue with reforms to transform SA's freight logistics system. An immediate priority is completing the recovery of the passenger rail network. In the run-up to the elections, many communities expressed concern about a basic human right not being realised due to infrastructure collapse and mismanagement: Water. In his Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday evening, President Cyril Ramaphosa committed the government of national unity (GNU) to "greater investment in bulk water infrastructure and better regulation of water services across the country". "The well-being of our people and the growth of our economy depends on another important issue, which is water," Ramaphosa said. "South Africa is a water-scarce country, and our water security is threatened by historical under-investment in bulk water resources and distribution infrastructure. "We will, therefore, continue with institutional reforms in the water sector to enable greater investment in bulk water infrastructure and better regulation of water services and sources across the country." He added that this would involve building dams, and that construction in a number of areas was already under way, "ensuring that reticulation also takes place as we build these dams". ON THE ROAD | Tinker Tanker Tender Dry: Residents say Vryburg water shortage is a man-made crisis Another crisis that came to a head during Ramaphosa's first term was logistics, involving freight rail and the ports. It is estimated that the logistics crisis shaved as much as 6.68% off the GDP in 2022. Ramaphosa said that to drive inclusive growth – one of the GNU's apex priorities - an efficient freight rail network was needed to carry minerals, agricultural produce and manufactured goods to the market. "Through the implementation of the Freight Logistics Roadmap, we will continue with reforms to transform South Africa's freight logistics system," Ramaphosa said, without expanding on these reforms. "The work we are doing with business and unions through the National Logistics Crisis Committee has already contributed to improvements in the operational performance of freight rail and ports." The government unveiled the Freight Logistics Roadmap in October last year, to improve the ports and rail networks and to encourage private sector participation. The National Logistics Crisis Committee was established in June 2022. It is an initiative between business leaders, organised labour, the government and its SOEs, including Transnet, the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa, and the South African National Road Agency Limited. READ | The looters living it up from Prasa millions Turning to another of the GNU's apex priorities - addressing poverty and the high cost of living – Ramaphosa said that, with many people living far from economic opportunities and services, transport costs take up a large part of people's income, which drives up the cost of living. "An immediate priority is, therefore, to complete the recovery of the passenger rail network across the country to enable people to travel from outlying areas to city centres." He said around 80% of commuter rail corridors are now back in operation, and nearly 300 vandalised stations have been refurbished, providing safer and more efficient services to commuters. Ramaphosa said the GNU would "forge a new inclusive growth path for South Africa by pursuing a massive investment in infrastructure". This "massive investment in infrastructure" would include roads.