Deputy president of the PA, Kenny Kunene, wants Sports, Arts, and Culture Minister Gayton McKenzie to institute a forensic investigation into Covid-19 funding irregularities. Kunene says the party will not respond to the ANC Youth League's criticism of the minister. He made the utterances on Thursday during a post-election media briefing at the Protea Hotel Fire & Ice, Melrose Arch, in Johannesburg. Deputy president of the Patriotic Alliance (PA), Kenny Kunene, has called on party president Gayton Mckenzie, who doubles as the new minister of sport, arts, and culture, to institute a forensic investigation into artists who benefited illegally from the department during the Covid-19 pandemic. Speaking during a post-elections media briefing in Johannesburg on Thursday, Kunene also defended McKenzie's energetic posture towards his new responsibility as a minister in the government of national unity Cabinet. He said: "As the Patriotic Alliance, we will obviously call upon the minister to start a forensic investigation and to follow where the money went so that people can be held accountable. The department of sports, arts, and culture, we have heard that it was an ATM. "People present things there and they get paid. We have also been informed that there is no accountability for how the money is spent. Nobody gives audited financial reports to the previous ministers on how they have spent the money. That is the taxpayers' money; it can never be misused." Kunene said the PA was fully behind McKenzie's decision to make the lists public. "We support Minister Gayton McKenzie for being transparent and we call upon him to continue publishing the lists so that South Africans will be able to see who has been supported. Our people are in poverty and only a select few are being supported," he said. READ | McKenzie changes tune about Makhadzi following her outburst Kunene said the party noted that the ANC Youth League has criticised McKenzie for demanding that the lists be made public. He was referring to the league cautioning the newly appointed minister to refrain from making hasty decisions and attacking creatives. McKenzie received backlash from the nation after he demanded the publication of a list of all artists and creatives who received financial support from the department during the Covid-19 pandemic. The minister wanted the lists published after BET-winning songbird Makhadzi revealed that she had to take a loan to get herself to the awards ceremony in the US because she did not receive funding from the department. According to a SABC report, ANCYL spokesperson, Zama Khanyase, said the minister had been in his position for less than a month and was already making decisions. Khanyase was quoted as saying, "What he should be doing is to get to his department, understand how it operates, understand how the government operates, and meet with those who are leading. He has not met with those who are leading; he has not met with the creatives." Khanyase added, "Instead, you have Makhadzi being publicly attacked by his department as we speak because she dared to complain that she was not supported when she went on an international trip where she was now representing South Africa. If you are going to international awards as an artist, it moves beyond being just about you now representing the country." READ | New minister Gayton McKenzie's bold blueprint for revitalising SA sports and arts Kunene said McKenzie was being slammed for "doing the right thing" and saying, "let us be transparent, let us take the lists out and let us let South Africans know who has been taken care of". "There is nothing wrong in people being supported, but he is saying, let us take out the lists so that we are transparent. Now, the ANCYL attacked him. We will not respond. Our attitude towards the GNU is that of dealing with misunderstandings and disagreements within the processes of the GNU, so we will not respond to the ANCYL, but we support the minister 1 000% for what he has done." After the lists were published, Kunene said he received calls from other artists whose names were on the list, but claimed they never received the funds. Kunene further said it was shocking that international artists were funded with money from the public purse. He charged: The minister must institute an investigation so that we can understand what happened there. This thing of not opening cases against people who have stolen from the poor must come to an end. Criminal charges must be pressed against those who have stolen. We support our minister. Turning his attention to those who have slammed McKenzie's approach to his new role, Kunene said it was not true that the minister was too excited. "Do you want an excited minister, or do you want a minister who is like a rat that has eaten Rattex? I want an excited minister," quipped Kunene. He likened McKenzie to former minister and ANC secretary-general, Fikile Mbalula, fondly known as "Razzmatazz." "Gayton McKenzie has got energy, is passionate and he reminds me of Razzmatazz. You can put Mbaks in any portfolio, Mbaks you will see him. You can even give Mbaks ministry of woodwork. We will all go and buy wood because Mbaks has the energy. "Gayton McKenzie is the same, so the excitement is because he loves his job, understands what is at stake, has been complaining about sportsmen and women not being taken seriously and artists and musicians not getting enough support," added Kunene. READ | New Sports, Arts and Culture minister kills the superfan joy McKenzie, he continued, has lamented the lack of sports facilities in rural areas. He said: "That is why after he was sworn in, the following day, he met with the officials at that department from 07:00am until midnight. That man is working. The excitement is not about becoming a minister. He has donated his salary. "The excitement is that he is now going to correct what he has been criticising. When you see him, appreciate the work that he is doing because the department of sports arts and culture has been seen as a dumping site for politicians." Kunene assured South Africans that they would see the impact of the department under McKenzie. "I know my brother, we talk, and when we assume a position, we go all out. Even in prison, I was the best tea boy in prison. When I was sick, the prison warders would ask: 'Where is Kenny? Where is Astra? (the fastest car at the time used by the time of his imprisonment.) I was fast. Within a few days, I knew what every warder drank, the time, and how much sugar, milk or no milk. I did not have to ask them, so we are passionate people."