The ANCYL in Gauteng welcomed Panyaza Lesufi's decision to form a government without the DA. It noted Lesufi's decision to keep the doors open to the DA after talks to form a government collapsed. But it expressed disappointment in the lack of youth representation in the premier's newly sworn-in executive. Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi must guard against a "silent coup" as he keeps the door open to further negotiations with the DA. This is the warning the ANC Youth League (ANCYL) in Gauteng had for Lesufi as it cautiously welcomed his decision to keep engaging with the DA after talks to form a government collapsed this week. Provincial convener Ntsako Mogobe said: "The door is still open, but the ANC must not agree to a silent coup and a backdoor running of government by proposals of the DA. "That is why we stand firm that the attitude in agreeing to serve in the government of national and provincial unity should be that of service to our people and not wanting to do a silent coup. We do not agree with that. We do not want underground operations." The ANCYL briefed the media at the Ruth First House in Johannesburg on Friday to weigh in on the newly appointed provincial executive committee and the developments in the formation of the government of provincial unity (GPU). On Wednesday night, Lesufi announced his provincial executive committee, which excluded the DA, but included Rise Mzansi, the PA, and the IFP - parties that are part of the government of national unity (GNU). Talks to form a government in Gauteng collapsed after the ANC accused the DA of reneging on an initial deal of three MEC positions. The DA, which counter-accused the ANC of "negotiating in bad faith", later decided to walk away from the talks and instead occupy opposition benches in Gauteng. According to a TimesLIVE report, this has also led to the DA withdrawing its deputy speaker in the Gauteng legislature, Refiloe Nt'sekhe, just two weeks into the job. Subsequently, Lesufi committed to "keeping the door open" to the DA. ANC Youth League fundraiser, Siyabonga Moloi, said GNU and GPU negotiations emphasised that "doors should be kept open" to all political parties that are willing to subscribe to the values of serving South Africans. READ | Gauteng stalemate: Lesufi announces a minority govt with PA, IFP and Rise Mzansi after DA pulls out Describing the situation in Gauteng, Moloi said: "If you look at the composition of the GPU in Gauteng currently, it is that the parties that have agreed to form government do not constitute more than 50%, so it might be difficult for the ANC to pass a budget. "We have 28 seats, Rise Mzansi has one seat, IFP has one seat, the Patriotic Alliance has two seats, and that makes up 32 seats. The number we are looking for to ensure that we run [a] government that is stable and not riddled with motions of no confidence must be over 50%. "We need parties that will have sufficient numbers that will take us to more than that 50%. It is true that, in Gauteng, you cannot form a government without the involvement of three parties, the DA, EFF and MK Party. "That is why we are coming out, as the ANCYL, to say, as pronounced by the premier, the doors are open. As long as you agree with the shared values that we need to deliver services to the people of Gauteng. The door is open for the DA, EFF, as well as other parties that are keen to work for the people of Gauteng. "So, we are going to accept if the DA guards against issues of their arrogance, negotiating in bad faith, and bullying the ANC," he said. Moloi added: We cannot allow the DA to come to Gauteng and bully the ANC, but if they want to negotiate in good faith, we will support the premier of Gauteng to allow them so that we can have stability because the manner in which the government is constituted now, it might even affect the functioning of local government. If the EFF wants to come to the party, the door is open. If the DA wants to come to the party, the door is also open. Moloi said the ANC had no choice, but to invite the EFF and MK Party. Explaining why, he said: "The manner in which our government is constituted, we might be vulnerable to agree on certain things, especially when we want to pass the budget, we might approach a particular party that has the number. "Whatever agreement that the ANC and the DA eventually enter into must be public and must be explained to the people of Gauteng. We do not want side agreements. The ANC must continue to persuade the DA, EFF and MK Party, and all other parties in the legislature to come into the GPU, so that the interest of the people of Gauteng is catered for." READ | Stalemate in Gauteng as DA refuses 'to be taken hostage in a government of provincial unity' The structure also expressed disappointment in the lack of youth representation in Lesufi's PEC. Moloi said the youth were consulted about the appointments, but they were surprised when young people were not appointed on Wednesday. "In those meetings, the framework was provided in appointing the Cabinet as well as the composition of that particular Cabinet. The framework was that the ANC would consider the alliance, youth, women, experience and retention. The premier should have considered young people to form part of that Cabinet," said Moloi. During the meetings, he said, the youth expressed a desire to form part of the government in Gauteng. While they were not happy with Lesufi, they congratulated President Cyril Ramaphosa for appointing an inclusive Cabinet. READ | 'DA is behaving like a spoilt brat,' says Maile as Lesufi delays Gauteng Cabinet announcement again ANCYL coordinator, Amukelani Mashele, said: "We have young people below the ages of 35 who are deputy ministers. We have Zuko Godlimpi, who is currently the acting spokesperson and is serving as deputy minister of trade and industry. "We have our former convener, Nonceba Mhlauli, serving in the Presidency, and Phumzile Mgcina, the deputy minister of labour. Those are young people who are tried and tested. They grew up in the ranks of the ANCYL and were polished by the ANC; we have seen them."