The MK Party pinned its hopes on the first judge to be removed, John Hlophe, to serve on the JSC. The same JSC found Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct for doing Jacob Zuma's bidding in 2008. Civil society organisations wrote to the Speaker to express concern about the possibility of Hlophe serving on an institution that selected and disciplined judges. Designating someone to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) who was found guilty by that same body of gross misconduct would be completely inappropriate, irrational and susceptible to legal challenge. This was the message of a group of civil society organisations to National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza after corruption-accused former president Jacob Zuma's MK Party nominated the first judge to be removed in democratic South Africa, John Hlophe, to serve on the JSC. Furthermore, the EFF nominated its "president and commander-in-chief", Julius Malema, to yet again serve on this body. EFF leader Julius Malema during his trial in the East London Regional Court. (EFFSouthAfrica/X) Malema, well-acquainted with the view of the court from the dock, was involved in much of the tumult that characterised the JSC's functioning in recent years. Parliament's ethics committee found that Malema should not have used the JSC as a "platform for his personal interests". As is his wont, Malema is challenging Parliament's attempt to hold him accountable for his actions as an MP in court. The DA nominated Glynnis Breytenbach, a former senior prosecutor who, like Malema, has served on the JSC since 2014. The ANC nominated Molapi Soviet Lekganyane and Fasiha Hassan, who is a lawyer. ActionSA nominated its parliamentary leader, Athol Trollip, who is an experienced legislator. The National Assembly's vote to elect the delegation was scheduled for Tuesday afternoon, along with the revival of the Appropriations Bill, the election of House chairpersons, and the elections of the National Assembly's delegations to the Pan-African Parliament (PAP), the SADC Parliamentary Forum and Magistrates Commission. At the start of proceedings, ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli, in whose name all these motions were, withdrew the elections of the House chairpersons, SADC Parliamentary Forum and JSC delegations. "The reason for this withdrawal, Madam Speaker, is to allow for further consultation on the matters that need to be cleared out on the motions above," said Ntuli. Didiza asked if there were any objections. There was none. Only after the motion to revive the Appropriations Bill was unanimously agreed to, and Ntuli read the motion on the PAP, did MK Party MPs complain about the withdrawal of the JSC motion. Didiza pointed out that they didn't raise an objection when she asked, and that Ntuli explained it was to allow for further consultations. ANALYSIS | Why the presence of Hlophe, Mkhwebane in Parliament makes case for electoral reform Meanwhile, Freedom Under Law (FUL) - which played a key role in Hlophe's eventual impeachment - the Council for the Advancement of the South African Constitution (Casac), Judges Matter, the Helen Suzman Foundation (HSF), Defend our Democracy, and the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation wrote to Didiza, saying they were "deeply concerned" about Hlophe's name appearing on the order paper. "The JSC plays a central role in the appointment of judges. Bearing in mind the extensive powers vested in the judiciary under the Constitution, it is no exaggeration to say that the work of the JSC is therefore crucial to the rule of law and constitutional democracy in South Africa," reads the letter. It highlighted some of the recent controversies surrounding the JSC, which led to litigation by Casac and FUL. "Particularly in light of this context, it is vital that those individuals designated to serve on the JSC are themselves individuals with a demonstrated commitment to upholding constitutional democracy, the rule of law, and the independence of the judiciary," stated the organisations. "It is in the context of the importance of the work of the JSC, and well-documented failures in how it has performed its role, that we raise concern about the prospective designation of Dr Hlophe. "Designating an individual to the JSC who has been found by the very body in question to have committed gross misconduct and has been removed from a position as a judicial officer to play a role in the selection of other judicial officers would be completely inappropriate. It would be irrational and, in our view, susceptible to legal challenge, and it would undermine public confidence in the judicial appointments process, and thereby in the judiciary." They concluded by urging the National Assembly not to vote for Hlophe's designation to the JSC, to "protect the integrity of the JSC, the judicial appointments process, and the judiciary". In May 2008, justices of the Constitutional Court laid a complaint with the JSC about Hlophe's attempt to convince Justices Chris Jafta and Bess Nkabinde to rule in Zuma's favour to overturn warrants used to seize 93 000 pages of corruption trial evidence against him. Jafta said Hlophe told him: "Sesithembele kinina [we pin our hopes on you]." After much further legal wrangling, it eventually culminated in the JSC finding Hlophe guilty of gross misconduct in August 2021. The JSC, in a majority ruling, found he had seriously threatened and interfered with the independence, impartiality, dignity and effectiveness of the Constitutional Court. It ruled that Hlophe improperly attempted to influence Nkabinde and Jafta to violate their oaths of office. After some more litigation, Parliament eventually dealt with the matter. In February, 305 MPs voted for Hlophe's removal. Despite now being an MP, Hlophe continues his litigation against Parliament over the impeachment process. READ | Karyn Maughan: Julius Malema despises judges – so why is he empowered to appoint them? Malema, and the party he leads, often accuse judges of being captured, especially those that rule against them, and never providing any evidence. As a JSC commissioner, he asked Judge Elias Matojane, a judge in the Gauteng High Court in Johannesburg at the time, about his ruling against the EFF in the defamation case brought against it by former finance minister Trevor Manuel. Matojane's ruling was almost entirely upheld by the SCA. It was this incident that led to the Ethics Committee's finding against him. He also levelled unsubstantiated allegations of sexual harassment against Gauteng Judge President Dunstan Mlambo during a JSC interview. This was expunged from the record. In JSC discussions last year, Malema also made unsubstantiated accusations of racism against Judge David Unterhalter. Judges Matter, in a statement on Tuesday, called on MPs to "select those members who will strengthen and protect the judiciary, to ensure an independent judiciary that upholds the rule of law and delivers justice for all South Africans". Mbekezeli Benjamin, a research and advocacy officer at Judges Matter, said the organisation had, for several years, called for a code of conduct for the JSC and Magistrates Commission. "The Code must hold commissioners to high ethical standards, with the option to recall those commissioners who fail to uphold it. But, while that process is underway, Parliament needs to come to the party and select only those members who will meet those high standards. "An obvious disqualifier is anyone who has been implicated in serious ethical breaches, state capture and/or misconduct. Parliamentarians represent the people of South Africa in those commissions, and Parliament must send only the best representatives." Meanwhile, an ANC MP, who the National Assembly found incompetent as a minister, who parliamentary legal services found attempted to mislead Parliament, and who featured in the Zondo Commission, will now help to appoint and dismiss magistrates. Faith Muthambi was elected as one of the delegates to the Magistrates Commission. Muthambi was Zuma's communications minister during a tumultuous time at the SABC. A parliamentary inquiry into the SABC found that Muthambi was incompetent in this position. Parliament's legal services later found that her testimony to the committee "could be seen as an attempt to mislead the inquiry". It emerged from the Gupta Leaks – a vast tranche of emails that blew the lid open on state capture in 2017 – that Muthambi emailed confidential government policy documents to one of the Gupta brothers. Appearing before the commission, Muthambi denied any wrongdoing, but Zondo didn't buy what she was selling. The report said: "I find the evidence of Ms Muthambi unconvincing, to say the least. She knew quite well she had unauthorised communications with the Guptas and, for that reason, did not disclose to the mentioned court who she had consulted with." Zondo rejected Muthambi's version that the Guptas were "innocent stakeholders" - and the report stated she had abused her power on a number of occasions.