Josias "Sias" Reynolds from the DA was elected as the new mayor of Beaufort West during a special council meeting last week. The DA controls the Beaufort West municipality with an outright majority for the first time. The troubled municipality has experienced a revolving door of leadership changes, with five mayors since the 2021 municipal elections. The newly sworn-in mayor of the beleaguered Beaufort West municipality says restoring stability to the town will take a while. The DA's Josias "Sias" Reynolds was elected as the new mayor during a special council meeting last week. The party now runs the municipality with an outright majority for the first time. In an interview with News24, Reynolds said his first day in office as mayor was "stormy" - a reference to the extreme weather lashing the Western Cape. "We're not going to try to make big changes and rock the boat completely. The idea is to get to the gist of the issues facing the town and make sure that we know exactly where the problem areas are," he added. READ | DA wins majority in Beaufort West by-elections, taking wards from PA and ANC Reynolds said the key focus of concern was refuse, water and the availability of flushing toilets. "We have a little bit of opportunity to see if we can alleviate most of the service delivery problems." After the 2021 municipal elections, the ANC and DA each won four seats in the council. The Patriotic Alliance (PA) won three seats and the GOOD party, and Karoo Democratic Force took a seat each. Since 2021, Beaufort West has had five mayors, starting with Gideon Pietersen, who held the position until June 2022. ALSO READ | Western Cape legislature to usher in new faces in major shake-up Pietersen was replaced by Thershia Prince, a former official in husband Truman Prince's office. She resigned in 2023 to make way for the PA's Ashley "Dubai West" Sauls. He resigned later that year to focus on his campaign for the Western Cape premiership. Ebenezer Botha, also from the PA, took the mayoral chains. However, his stint did not last long. News24 previously reported Botha handed in his resignation after it emerged he had allegedly assaulted his fiancée. READ MORE | 'The Western Cape can break': Steenhuisen pleads with voters to keep DA in power and avoid coalition News24 obtained a voice note of audio of the alleged assault, which was circulated widely on WhatsApp. In June, the DA's fortunes turned. The party took control of three wards in Beaufort West, ensuring an outright majority in the local council for the first time. Reynolds did not want to talk about his predecessors, but conceded residents had lost trust in their leaders. He said: People don't have any trust in what's going to happen and what decisions are being made, so I'm not going to point out any specific issues with a specific mayor because then we're going to get personal. "But I think that just because we have the majority it's going to be easier, we just need to have an open line of communication," he said. On that majority, Reynolds added voters had made it clear they wanted services. "Look, I have to be honest… there was a big percentage of stayaway voters, but I think the [people] who did actually vote want good governance and decent services."