National police commissioner Fannie Masemola told officers to ensure President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address happens in a stable and peaceful environment. Police Minister Senzo Mchunu implored officers to demonstrate high standards of professionalism, integrity and intelligence. Defence Minister Angie Motshekga added the army would support the police in ensuring an incident-free event. The National Joint Operational Intelligence Structure has been given strict orders to ensure President Cyril Ramaphosa delivers a successful Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday evening. Addressing men and women in blue at the Castle of Good Hope in Cape Town ahead of the all-important speech - which will set the tone for the seventh administration under the government of national unity - national police commissioner Fannie Masemola said officers must serve the country. "The president will open the Parliament. Our work is to ensure it goes and happens in a stable and peaceful environment. "You are not going to be a spectator where you are going to be. You will be allocated responsibilities as the Constitution says it is our work to prevent, combat and investigate crime," he added. Masemola told officers to "at all times uphold the law and don't be afraid to enforce the law if there is anybody that crosses the line. You have been given orders and instructions and you know exactly what to do". WATCH: Earlier, Police Minister, Senzo Mchunu, and Defense Minister Angie Motshekga said it's all systems go ahead of President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening Of Parliament in Cape Town this evening. @News24 pic.twitter.com/80nAuT3UkI — Amanda Khoza - The Journalist (@MandaKhoza) July 18, 2024 Police Minister Senzo Mchunu reminded the officers that the event was not just a ceremonial occasion, but a pivotal moment that underscored South Africa's democratic principles. "We hope and trust that you will discharge your duties with diligence," said Mchunu. He added the role of the police was to ensure safety and security during the event, saying: The eyes of the nation and of the world will be upon us. We must demonstrate high standards, professionalism, integrity and intelligence. The minister also asked for effective communication and coordination during the event. "Our joint operations must be seamless, clear communication channels and real time information must be shared to pre-empt and neutralise any potential threats from any point. "I urge all involved parties to ensure that all the information gathered up until now is properly and promptly disseminated while we hold our positions." Mchunu called on the officers to be vigilant, alert and to ensure the day was a success. READ | DEVELOPING: Opening of Parliament: All eyes on Cape Town City Hall Defence Minister Angie Motshekga said the army would support the police in ensuring the event was incident-free. "The defence force is the pride of the nation; we are here also to ensure and make sure that South Africans have an opportunity to admire and see the beauty of their country and protection of the nation through the ceremonials that we are going to be doing today." Motshekga added South Africans must rest assured they were defended and protected from the seas to the skies. "We are ready for the ceremonial activities that the defence force will be part of," she added. Due to the inclement weather and time, the minister said: "It is winter, and it gets dark earlier in Cape Town and there will be rain from the predictions. We may not have the flag fly over as part of our military display. But we are ready."