President Cyril Ramaphosa has wished former US president Donald Trump well after an attempted assassination. World leaders have rapidly condemned Saturday's attack on Donald Trump at a rally in Pennsylvania. Trump was shot in the ear, and rushed to safety in dramatic scenes captured on live television. President Cyril Ramaphosa has joined the international chorus in condemning the attempted assassination of former US president Donald Trump. World leaders have rapidly condemned Saturday's attack on Donald Trump at a rally in Pennsylvania, in which the former president was shot in the ear, expressing shock, denouncing political violence and wishing him a quick recovery. The Trump campaign said later that Trump, who is running again for the White House in November's US election, was "doing well". The FBI identified 20-year-old Thomas Matthew Crooks of Bethel Park, Pennsylvania, as the "subject involved" in what it termed an attempted assassination. Ramaphosa was one of the first African leaders to condemn the attack on Trump. LIVE | Trump seen walking off plane unaided after rally shooting, FBI identifies 20-year-old shooter In a post on X (formerly Twitter), Ramaphosa said the attempted assassination of Trump is a stark reminder of the dangers of political extremism and intolerance. "Political violence is the antithesis of democracy. I wish former President Trump a speedy recovery. We unequivocally denounce this political violence and earnestly hope that the citizens and leaders of America will have the fortitude and sagacity to reject violence and seek peaceful solutions," he said. The attempted assassination of former President Donald Jr. Trump is a stark reminder of the dangers of political extremism and intolerance. Political violence is the antithesis of democracy. I wish former President Trump a speedy recovery.We unequivocally denounce this… — Cyril Ramaphosa ???? (@CyrilRamaphosa) July 14, 2024 In April 2020, at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, Ramaphosa had a telephonic call with Trump. Trump pledged to send "thousands" of ventilators and other equipment to SA, but at the time the full details were not finalised. In turn, Ramaphosa passed his condolences to the families who had lost their lives due to the pandemic. Meanwhile, world leaders condemned Trump's attempted assassination. A spokesperson for United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres condemned the shooting and called it an "act of political violence". Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida said: "We must stand firm against any form of violence that challenges democracy". Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban, who met Trump this week while visiting the US for a NATO summit, said his prayers were with the former president "in these dark hours". My thoughts and prayers are with President @realDonaldTrump in these dark hours. ?? — Orbán Viktor (@PM_ViktorOrban) July 13, 2024 Orban is one of the few European leaders who has openly expressed his support for Trump to be re-elected. Another close ally of Trump, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, called him a friend and wished him a speedy recovery while saying: "Strongly condemn the incident. Violence has no place in politics and democracies". Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva called the shooting unacceptable, while also urging others to condemn it. "The attack against former president Donald Trump must be vehemently repudiated by all defenders of democracy and dialogue in politics. What we saw today is unacceptable," Da Silva said. British Prime Minister Keir Starmer said he was "appalled by the shocking scenes" at the rally. I am appalled by the shocking scenes at President Trump's rally and we send him and his family our best wishes.Political violence in any form has no place in our societies and my thoughts are with all the victims of this attack. — Keir Starmer (@Keir_Starmer) July 14, 2024 "Political violence in any form has no place in our societies and my thoughts are with all the victims of this attack." Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky said there was "no justification" for such violence and he was "relieved" that Trump, who has frequently criticised US military aid to Ukraine amid Russia's invasion, was safe and wished him "a speedy recovery". Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese said the shooting was "concerning and confronting". Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said it left him "sickened". "Political violence is never acceptable,” Trudeau added. I fully endorse President Trump and hope for his rapid recovery pic.twitter.com/ZdxkF63EqF — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) July 13, 2024 French President Emmanuel Macron said of the shooting: "France shares the shock and indignation of the American people. It is a tragedy for our democracies." Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu also said the shooting left him shocked. Similar comments were made by the leaders of the European Union, Egypt, Thailand, Taiwan, South Korea, New Zealand, Italy, Sweden, the Netherlands and the Philippines.