Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya has responded to harassment allegations former minister Lindiwe Sisulu had made. Magwenya said the minister or any other person who has information implicating Presidency staff in wrongdoing should report the information to the Office of the Presidency. "With respect to claims of 'bugging of everybody,' such action would have been unconstitutional and illegal," he added. The Presidency has urged ANC veteran Lindiwe Sisulu and anyone else who has information implicating its staff in wrongdoing to present the information to its director-general, Phindile Baleni, for further investigation. "If the former minister felt maligned, allegedly by a staff member in the Presidency, she should have furnished that information to the [director-general]. However, such logical action was not followed," Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya said. He was responding to Sisulu's allegations that she had allegedly been harassed on social media platform X, formerly known as Twitter, by a person using the handle Goolam. Sisulu, who was addressing those who attended an Independent Media briefing in Cape Town on Monday, said that during an investigation into who was behind the Goolam handle, it was discovered that the person was a Presidency employee. "For some time, we tried to track Goolam down and we found that the person who was fronting for Goolam was in the Presidency, and a woman dealing with communication. We didn't get any further than that, and I regretted that our media has got to the point where it is now. "I was the first Minister of Intelligence in this country. The previous one had been Joe Nhlanhla, and he passed away prematurely, so we were responsible for ensuring that the integrity of information and the individual's information was dealt with. We had very regular meetings with the media and we, ourselves, were exposed to a lot of information. We bugged everybody, essentially." READ | Mondli Makhanya: Sisulu's ambitions are just a sideshow, despite her revered family name According to the Presidency, Nhlanhla was elected as an MP in the first democratic Parliament in 1994 and was appointed deputy minister for intelligence services in February 1995. In 1999, former President Thabo Mbeki appointed him as the Minister for Intelligence Services, a position he held until he was no longer able to due to ill health. Mbeki replaced Nhlanhla with Sisulu in 2001, and in 2004, the portfolio was given to Ronnie Kasrils, who served until 2008. When ministers take office, they make an oath "not to divulge directly or indirectly any secret matter entrusted" to them and to perform the functions of their office conscientiously and to the best of their ability. Although she revealed what transpired under her watch, Sisulu said: "An essential element in everybody who worked in intelligence is that what they know, they cannot repeat, and even if a journalist were to get to them, they were not allowed to. We had this ethical basis in intelligence to ensure that we can drive a society that is based on ethics." However, she said she was personally attacked when she took on President Cyril Ramaphosa as an ANC presidential candidate in 2022. "I had every right, as everybody has, to stand if they felt like that. I was born in the ANC, and I thought, well, I am old enough now to take a senior position, and Goolam did not let go. We tried to trace Goolam, and we were stuck with this particular woman, and we thought: 'How does this woman get so petty and nasty?' "But the essence of what was happening is that if you found my name in the newspaper, it was always attached to the most negative narrative. I have worked all my life for the organisation and to be free," said Sisulu. Magwenya said the most rational course of action for anyone in possession of information implicating Presidency staff in wrongdoing was to provide that evidence to Baleni for further investigation and due process. The Presidency has an active and very popular presence on social media, he said. The following are the Presidency's social media accounts: X - @PresidencyZA X - @CyrilRamaphosa YouTube - @PresidencyZA LinkedIn and Facebook - Cyril Ramaphosa Apart from these accounts and their millions of followers, the Presidency has no other social media presence, Magwenya said. He added: With respect to claims of 'bugging of everybody,' such action would have been unconstitutional and illegal. Perhaps the former minister will take some time to reflect on the veracity and implications of her comments. News24 contacted Sisulu, asking her to clarify her comments and to provide proof of the allegations she made about the Presidency staff member, but the call was unanswered. This publication also asked the former minister to clarify whom she was referring to when she said: "We bugged everybody." Her comments will be added to the story as soon as she responds. Sisulu's spokesperson, Mphumzi Mdekazi, said the former minister was flying and could not respond to questions. "Feel free to do your own research," he told News24 when asked to provide proof for Sisulu's utterances. READ | Steven Ncobo | Lindiwe Sisulu is the president South Africa never had In a video doing the rounds on social media, Mohammed Yacoob Vawda, who Independent Media accused of being behind the controversial Goolam handle, said: "This is very weird, but a lot of things have been circulating about me nationally that I am some guy behind some Twitter [X] account, and I am definitely not that guy. "I don't even use Twitter, I have not used Twitter for like eight years. It's false allegations. I have nothing to do with this. I don't get involved in any type of politics at all." It did not even take 5 hours for Iqbal Surve and his Independent Media to be exposed as liars and frauds again. They have now put an innocent person's life at risk . Lindiwe Sisulu was part of this craziness. Let's pray that Mohammed Vawda and his family stay safe. Iqbal Surve… https://t.co/luBLwmPeEY — Goolam (@goolammv) July 15, 2024 Vawda said that he and his family were receiving death threats and added: "I cannot believe that this was put in the media. It's definitely false allegations, and I don't even know anything about politics and the people in politics, to be honest. I only know the heads of political parties and no one else. So, for me, this is the weirdest and scariest news that can ever happen, and I am very fearful for my life."