The police allocated more than R2 billion to its VIP Protection Unit. The unit protects the president, his deputy and other dignitaries. In contrast, the Family Violence and Child Protection Unit was allocated R1.485 billion. The police's VIP Protection Unit, which is responsible for protecting the president and his deputy, received R600 million more than what was allocated to fight gender-based violence (GBV) and protect the children of South Africa. In publishing its annual performance plan in Parliament this week, the South African Police Service (SAPS) detailed its spending priorities over the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF). The MTEF allocation for the 2024/25 financial year is R113 billion. It then increases to R119 billion in 2025/26 and R124 billion in 2026/27. One of the standout budget items is that of the VIP Protection Unit, which gets a whopping R2.177 billion. In contrast, the Family Violence and Child Protection Unit was allocated R1.485 billion. This unit deals with GBV and crimes against children in a country in which more than 800 children were murdered between April and December 2023, according to statistics. READ | 'Less talk, more action': New minister's first task should be to restore trust in police - experts In February, former police minister Bheki Cele said 4 264 people had been arrested for GBV-related crimes, such as rape and sexual assault, in the third quarter of 2023. During a briefing to the Portfolio Committee on Police this week, Major-General Leon Rabie, the SAPS head of strategic management, said the VIP Protection Unit provided security services to top government officials, dignitaries and other persons of government interest. "VIP Protection Services provides for the protection of the president, deputy president, former presidents, their spouses and other identified dignitaries while in transit. Static protection provides for the protection of other local and foreign dignitaries and the places in which all dignitaries, including persons related to the president and the deputy president, are present. "Compensation is a prominent element for all protection/security functions, with significant overtime costs," Rabie said in a presentation. Asked for comment, the Presidency referred queries to the police. The EFF's Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said the police's priorities were skewed because the money spent on crime prevention was not bringing the desired effect. "Our murder rate can be compared to war zones. You can see the number of people who get killed every day is possibly compared to people who are dying in Palestine every day. The differences may be extremely little, and there are a war-like military bombardments and so on. "But I think that we all know, we understand that there is this abnormal question of high levels of murder in South Africa. If you check the top of the top 30 police stations in relation to murder, the list is almost the same for the past 25 years, with very minimal [changes]," he said. [About this morning] Meeting the National Commissioner of @SAPoliceService together with the Deputy Ministers. Will be receiving orientation on this important portfolio, tasked with the safety and security of our nation. It is indeed an honour to be in service of the people ???? pic.twitter.com/2r8ohuXimT — Senzo Mchunu (@Senzo_Mchunu_) July 4, 2024 ActionSA's Dereleen James said what was on police records was not the reality at police stations. "When we question police stations in terms of vehicles that are running, we get told that a specific police station has, let's just say, 10 vehicles, [but] when we do an investigation, we find that of the 10 vehicles, actually six vehicles have been in repairs for the past three years now. That is a great concern, especially in communities," James said. To bolster crime-fighting efforts, Rabie said crime investigations had been allocated R12.015 billion, vehicle theft units were allocated R573 million, and stock theft units were allocated R700 million. Rabie also said an additional R22.278 billion was allocated to the police over the MTEF. Of that amount, R21.988 billion was allocated to compensation "for the carry-through costs of the 2023/24 cost-of-living salary adjustments". An additional R290 million was availed for increased increased policing presence during the 2024 general elections. READ | Cele’s political appointee made permanent Meanwhile, the operational budget was reduced by R8.651 billion over the MTEF, while goods and services budget was cut by R4.968 billion. Other items include a reduction of the buildings and structure repairs budget by R1.575 billion, a reduction of the machinery and equipment budget by R2.1 billion, and a biological assets reduction of R7.948 million. Some of the biggest budgets items include crime prevention (R38.8 billion), rail police (R1.321 billion), K9 Units (R985 million), mounted police (R177 million), youth, children and vulnerable people outreach (R41 million), Flying Squad (R1.387 billion), detained persons (R383 million) and border security, including ports of entry (R2.535 billion). Specialised Units, which is made up of the elite Special Task Force, received R82 million, the National Intervention Unit was allocated R804 million, Tactical Response Teams got R590 million, and Public Order Policing received R4.110 billion to deal with ever-increasing violent riots in the country.