The Public Service Commission warned new Cabinet ministers they could not summarily get rid of directors-general (DGs). DGs are appointed on a five-year basis to professionalise the public service. New DGs may be appointed for new departments, such as agriculture, which was separated from land reform and rural development. New Cabinet ministers were warned they could not fire their directors-general (DGs) because of political differences. DGs are seen as the main executors of government projects across national and provincial departments. On Monday, the Public Service Commission (PSC) published its quarterly Pulse of the Public Service report, warning ministers and other senior government officials to work together to deliver on departmental mandates. This comes weeks after the general elections in May and the subsequent appointment of the national executive, which consists of ministers drawn from the ANC and eight opposition political parties. PSC commissioner Vusumuzi Mavuso said DGs were appointed for five years, and they could not simply be removed by new ministers. READ | Support GNU to ensure 'decisions are made in interests of SA', PSC tells public servants "Therefore, it is incumbent upon ministers to be able to strike a relationship with their respective directors-general before they can even come to wanting to have their own," he added. "We believe the public service has to be professionalised … it has to be and it's non-negotiable. All those who have been appointed do have a right to be in the positions in which they are – unless, of course, they committed misdemeanours. Then, of course, the due process of law must unfold to make an outcome or determination. "You can't come with what I may call 'skop-skiet-en-donner', that DGs must just pack and go because they don't want them. "All directors-general are appointed for a particular term, a fixed-term period," he said, referring to the five-year appointment period. "There ought to be an assessment to check the suitability or competency of those directors-general or even other lower-ranking officials," Mavuso said. President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed several Cabinet members from different political parties when establishing the government of national unity (GNU) as no party received an outright majority in the 29 May polls. During negotiations to form the GNU, the DA wanted to have a say in the appointments of directors-general. ALSO READ | Cosatu calls on Parliament to show 'moral fortitude' against 'delinquent' MPs However, News24 understands most, if not all, DGs are staying on in their positions, even in the departments now led by DA members. New DGs may be appointed for new departments, such as agriculture, which was separated from the land reform and rural development department. DA leader John Steenhuisen was appointed as the minister of agriculture. Another PSC commissioner, Anele Gxoyiya, said directors-general worked for the public service, not for ministers. He added: We would understand there might have been mistakes in the past ... that led to directors-general being removed. What we are saying at the PSC is that, in the context of building a capable state, we need a professional public service that is insulated from politicking. "We need a cadre of public servants who are prepared and ready to serve anyone who gets elected to office, irrespective of political affirmation," Gxoyiya said. He added there were no reasons for DGs to be removed on a whim unless there was evidence of incompetence or misconduct. "In the two weeks or so that there was no government in the country, the public service continued to work. Services were delivered to the people. That's the kind of public service we want … we don't want people who are preoccupied with politics. "We would discourage any attempts to remove people on the basis of them not having been appointed by certain people," Gxoyiya said.