The DA is now part of SA's biggest national executive. It comprises 75 members - 32 ministers and 43 deputy ministers. A bloated Cabinet was one of several issues for which the DA had previously criticised the ANC. While on the opposition benches in Parliament, the DA consistently barked at the ANC for appointing a bloated national Cabinet, resulting in billions of rand wasted on ministerial perks. Now, with the establishment of a government of national unity (GNU), the DA is no longer the official opposition and occupies 12 seats in President Cyril Ramaphosa's 75-member national executive – the biggest ever in South Africa's democratic era. The DA has consistently advocated for a much smaller and leaner national executive - but now that the party is part of the biggest ever Cabinet it has gone silent. News24 approached Helen Zille, the DA's federal council chairperson, for comment. She referred all queries to party leader John Steenhuisen's office. The DA's national spokesperson, Solly Malatsi, who was appointed as communications minister, told News24 the size of the Cabinet was the president's prerogative. "You have to consider the fact that the portfolios the DA are occupying are not new portfolios that have contributed to an expansion of the Cabinet," he said. READ | Two ANC ministers demoted as DA secures six ministers, six deputy ministers in new-look Cabinet But that is not entirely correct. The agriculture ministry was separated from the land reform and rural development ministry. In announcing his Cabinet, Ramaphosa appointed Steenhuisen as agriculture minister. Malatsi said: It is important to recognise that we find ourselves in a unique era of a coalition government, in which the size of the Cabinet has been determined by the president. For us, the priority right now is to ensure that we can play a meaningful role in this administration, and to have Cabinet ministers perform ethically, excellently and diligently in this administration. I'm going to leave it at that. The DA's participation in the GNU goes directly against the party's vision 2029, which calls for the establishment of a 15-member Cabinet. According to the policy document, the DA can reconfigure the executive, realign some of the associated national departments and save an estimated R4.7 billion each year. It must be emphasised that a significant amount of unproductive spending in the public sector stems from the Cabinet. Good morning my fellow South Africans. The time for collaboration, has arrived. But this collaboration is not only between political leaders. Collaboration is now also required between the Government of National Unity, and the people who voted to create it. ???? pic.twitter.com/0f0tRgmXHi — John Steenhuisen MP (@jsteenhuisen) July 1, 2024 The DA's 15-ministries plan includes: Employment and Enterprise Economic Infrastructure Finance Basic Education Further Education, Skills and Innovation Health and Social Development Integrated Planning and Service Delivery Police Local and Provincial Government Home Affairs Agriculture and Land Reform Justice and Correctional Services Environment Foreign Affairs Defence READ | EFF vows to 'undermine' GNU's 'backward policies' as parties react to Ramaphosa's executive Under former president Jacob Zuma, South Africa had one of the largest Cabinets in the world, comprised of the president, deputy president, 35 ministers and 37 deputy ministers. Now, it's even bigger. There are 32 ministers, of which six are from the DA. And there are 43 deputy ministers, of which six are from the DA. The bloated Cabinet has been criticised from all quarters. In a statement, the Organisation Outdoing Tax Abuse (OUTA) spoke out about some ministers who had been retained. "While we welcome the clarity on the composition of the Cabinet, we are unimpressed with the increased size of what was already a bloated Cabinet. We believe the increase was so the president could accommodate 'old friends', such as Blade Nzimande and Gwede Mantashe, who have not performed well in their previous positions and would have been better left out," said OUTA. ActionSA's president, Herman Mashaba, said the bloated Cabinet was a bad first impression of the seventh administration. Mashaba said: Contrary to past commitments by both President Ramaphosa and the DA, the appointment of 32 ministers and 43 deputy ministers shows that, when they stand to benefit, their principles soon fall by the wayside. "South Africans have been calling for a reduction in the size of the Cabinet for years, given that our country has one of the largest Cabinets in the world in the context of a country, where most of its citizens languish in poverty and struggle to keep up with the cost of living."