In his Opening of Parliament Address, Cyril Ramaphosa said GNU parties would seek consensus. This was the president's comment after speaking about the implementation of the NHI. The DA remains staunchly opposed to the NHI in its current form. In his Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday evening, President Cyril Ramaphosa expressed confidence that parties in the government of national unity (GNU) could iron out their differences on a policy the DA had already indicated it would continue to oppose: The National Health Insurance (NHI). "An important task of the next five years is to ensure that we also reduce the high cost of living through ensuring that everyone in South Africa has equal access to equitable, accessible and affordable quality healthcare," Ramaphosa said. "As we implement the National Health Insurance, we will focus on strengthening healthcare infrastructure, which many people during the debate and discussion on the NHI have said we must focus on. We will also improve [the] training of healthcare personnel and use technology to improve healthcare management. "Now, while there is much contestation around the NHI, there is broad agreement that we must draw on the resources and capabilities of both the public and private sectors to meet the healthcare needs of all South Africans equally. "In implementing the NHI, we are confident that we will be able to bring stakeholders together and that we will be able to resolve differences and clarify misunderstandings." READ | GNU contradictions: Parties clash over NHI in first debate of seventh Parliament Then, appearing to diverge from his prepared speech, Ramaphosa added: "Now, as the government of national unity, we have agreed that we will seek to build consensus around issues that we may not agree on. And there are a number of issues that we agree on. What unites us? We are united on many issues. And there are issues that we still need to find full agreement on. And yes, we will work hard to make sure that we do find agreement." Ramaphosa signed the NHI Act into law two weeks before the elections despite a chorus of resistance from medical practitioners, the business community and opposition parties. Last week, in the very first debate of the seventh parliament on the health budget, Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi delivered an impassioned plea for the NHI. However, two GNU partners, the DA and FF Plus, expressed their opposition to it. READ | 'NHI frustrates universal healthcare': GNU partners still struggling with controversial health act On Wednesday, DA leader John Steenhuisen, who serves in Ramaphosa's Cabinet, said "the NHI, in its current form, will frustrate universal access to basic healthcare for at least a generation". "I think there are some areas where the bill can be amended or changed, or the approach and regulations can be changed to reintroduce choice to treat the private sector as a partner in fixing the public healthcare sector," he added. He said the GNU parties had not been able to find common ground on the NHI but remained upbeat about the GNU's prospects.