In his Opening of Parliament Address, President Cyril Ramaphosa spoke about deploying modern technology to assist in the fight against crime. Newly appointed Police Minister Senzo Mchunu previously said the police needed to be modernised. His budget speech, Mchunu said they have set aside almost R3 million for technology to help fight crime. President Cyril Ramaphosa has touted deploying modern technology as a key tool in the fight against crime in the country. In his Opening of Parliament Address on Thursday evening, Ramaphosa said to tackle crime and corruption, the country must have capable, sophisticated and independent law enforcement agencies that could fight complex and organised crime. He added: We will deploy modern technology to assist crime fighting. A data-driven approach will be used to identify violent crime hotspots and inform the allocation of policing resources alongside prevention measures. The president added law enforcement would continue to tackle priority crimes, including illegal mining, gang violence, cash-in-transit heists and the construction mafia through specialised police units. Basics and tech Responding to Ramaphosa's comments about modern technology for crime fighting, criminologist Guy Lamb said the police needed improved technology. Lamb added deploying modern technology would be particularly helpful in the fight against organised and cybercrime. He said the better use of crime analytics would also help in decision-making around the deployment of resources. However, Lamb added while technology could help fight crime, if people did not trust the police, it would not make a big difference. He said the police had to get the basics right to make a greater impact. Lamb referenced Police Minister Senzo Mchunu's calls for the professionalisation of police officers and building credibility as a good starting point for the incoming minister. Mchunu made the comments during his budget speech this week. Ramaphosa said the government would continue to implement the Gender-based Violence and Femicide National Strategic Plan and expand victim support services, like the Thuthuzela centres and gender-based violence desks in police stations. Mchunu added one of their top priorities was to reduce violent crime, gender-based violence and femicide. READ | 'He mustn't come waste our time tonight': Here's what South Africans hope Ramaphosa will address "We will place a strong emphasis on community mobilisation to increase police visibility through strategic partnerships," he said. Ramaphosa's comments on technology coincide with Mchunu's budget speech to the National Assembly on Tuesday where he presented the police budget for the 2024/25 financial year, which totals R113 597 billion. Technological advancements Mchunu had dedicated a part of his speech to modernising the police. "We recognise the importance of modernising our police service to meet the challenges of the 21st century and beyond," he said. "Our modernisation initiatives include upgrading ICT infrastructure, improving connectivity, and deploying mobile technologies. These technological advancements will enhance our ability to respond swiftly and effectively to criminal activities." The minister said R2.845 billion had been set aside to modernise the crime fighting organisation for the 2024/25 financial year. Mchunu also spoke to crimes that impact economic activity, such as illegal mining and extortion by so-called construction mafias, as alluded to by Ramaphosa. "We understand the critical importance of protecting our economy from criminal activities. "Economic infrastructure task teams, supported by organised crime investigation capabilities, will focus on combating crimes such as illegal mining, infrastructure-related crimes, and extortion in all business sectors, particularly the construction sector." He said specialised capabilities, including the Hawks, forensic services, and Crime Intelligence, would collaborate with both internal and external stakeholders to address these issues effectively. In his first media briefing as police minister on Monday, Mchunu also focused on the need to prioritise the rollout of new technologies to detect and deter crimes. "Criminals have become sophisticated over the years, and old-fashioned crime fighting, and detection methods will not succeed," he said. Mchunu added: Advanced technologies such as data analytics, artificial intelligence, surveillance systems, and digital communication tools enable police to better predict, prevent, and respond to criminal activities. The minister said these technologies would provide police officers with real-time information, improving decision-making and facilitating faster, more accurate investigations. "Technology also enhances transparency and accountability and fosters greater public trust. "We will benchmark against other successful law enforcement agencies worldwide and endeavour to bring SAPS on par with the best in terms of technology and operational efficiency," he added.