South Africa's foreign policy won't change much, even with a new government of national unity. According to newly appointed International Relations and Cooperation Minister Ronald Lamola, the country's non-alignment is sacrosanct. Lamola believes the non-aligned approach can help mediate between Russia and Ukraine. Under a government of national unity (GNU), South Africa's "non-alignment" and "universality" posture on the global stage will remain sacrosanct. This is according to newly appointed International Relations and Cooperation Minister Ronald Lamola who has signalled that there won't be much change to the country's foreign policy. On Thursday, Lamola spoke at a symposium hosted by the South African Institute of International Affairs ahead of his department's budget vote in Parliament. Lamola told diplomats and other senior officials the GNU's statement of intent commits to a foreign policy guided by "human rights, constitutional principles, and the national interest, as well as solidarity and the peaceful resolution of conflict". READ | Government to tackle Ireland's new visa rules aimed at South Africa, Botswana According to Lamola, the evolving international world order necessitates the strengthening of the non-aligned movement. "South Africa, with its unique policy of active non-alignment, is not reactive but proactive in its pursuit of peace. This approach is not about being neutral or abstaining from world affairs, but about leading a unifying agenda through dialogue to achieve peace for developing countries that do not wish to take sides in great power rivalry. "As sovereign nations, we seek independent foreign policies aligning with our developmental priorities. This makes non-aligned countries useful mediators in conflicts like that between Russia and Ukraine," he said. Lamola said the war in Eastern Europe has been felt globally, most notably on the African continent. "It has led to significantly increased consumer prices, particularly of food and energy. This underscores the critical need for immediate global cooperation to end conflicts and address their current economic impact. In the emerging world order, we are more cognisant than ever that economic prosperity largely depends on stability, peace and respect for the rule of law. Minister @RonaldLamola and Deputy Minister @alvinbotes engage at SAIIA symposium on @GovernmentZA foreign Policy : “We will continue to build this great nation, effectively address our most pressing national challenges, and forge greater unity on our continent.” @RonaldLamola pic.twitter.com/SRGrA4CJd7 — Chrispin Phiri ???????? (@Chrispin_JPhiri) July 11, 2024 "There can be no peace in any part of the world where people are being oppressed or struggling under the yoke of colonialism and occupation. We will continue to engage the world as equals. South Africa's 'non-alignment' and 'universality' posture will remain sacrosanct," he said. The South African government maintains that diplomacy and dialogue are the only path to resolving the bloody war between Russia and Ukraine. In stark contrast, the government has taken a much stronger approach to the Israeli-Palestine war, actively supporting the Palestinians. South Africa hauled Israel before the International Court of Justice for the war between the two Middle Eastern nations. Meanwhile, South Africa's foreign policy will continue to focus more on the African continent. ALSO READ | Phillip de Wet: It got weird when SA went to Russia and spoke only about Gaza "We aim to ensure the peace, development and security of the continent, aligning with the aspirations of Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals. We can be proud of our progress and confident in our future contributions. "We will continue to deepen and harness our relations with our partners on the continent. We have established 46 structured bilateral mechanisms, 12 of which are at the presidential level. These mechanisms afford our country the opportunity to exchange views on national, regional and global issues," he said. Lamola also said a stronger African Union will have a larger, more coordinated influence on global matters.