Leon Schreiber was appointed as the new home affairs minister. President Cyril Ramaphosa made the announcement on Sunday night. Refugees had mixed reactions to the new appointment. Some refugees, migrants and asylum seekers have little hope that anything will change under new Home Affairs Minister Leon Schreiber. President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday night announced his much-anticipated Cabinet, but refugees and migrants living in South Africa say they doubt change will ever come. Olowale Okoro, 38, a Nigerian living in Sea Point, Cape Town, said foreign nationals who entered the country with fake identities ruined everything for people who had the correct papers. "I understand that Nigerians are red-flagged everywhere because of drugs and fake documents, but there are a few truthful Nigerians," he said. Okoro, however, told News24 he was looking forward to less graft. "I hope the new minister will clean out the rotten potatoes, so that people with the correct papers will have a fair chance of living in South Africa... and everyone who doesn't should return to their countries," said Okoro. Ngonidzashe Chikokonya, 32, a Zimbabwean living in Kayamandi, in Stellenbosch, said she had little hope for the home affairs department, even with a new minister. "I don't think the new home affairs minister will bring any change because the problems refugees face in South Africa have been there for years and no political party has ever attended to it," Chikokonya said. "South African political leaders are, instead, plotting to get rid of foreigners from African countries... but they smile with European foreigners." Chikokonya claimed: Illegal foreigners should go back to their countries, but there are people who lost their papers while in South Africa and need help. The home affairs department will not even listen to them, unless they pay certain amounts of money. Zia Abdul Khaliq, 35, a Pakistani living in Cape Town, came to South Africa in 2006 to escape poverty. "I left my country immediately after completing high school and came to live with my older brother, who was already in SA for six years at the time," he said. "I run a small spaza shop in Cape Town, and the police often come to harass me and demand money. It's the same story with the home affairs and traffic departments," said Abdul Khaliq. READ | Working together to 'serve the people': Ramaphosa names new Cabinet Sharon Ekambaram, the head of the Refugee and Migrant Rights Programme at Lawyers for Human Rights, expressed her anticipation to meet the newly appointed minister, and to collaborate with the home affairs department, rather than resorting to litigation. According to Ekambaram, the previous administration failed to engage constructively with civil society to address issues, such as the quality of decision-making in refugee protection applications as well as access to refugee reception offices amid systemic xenophobia and corruption. Speaking to News24, she said the government should routinely engage civil society and partner with legal experts to uphold human rights standards. Ekambaram added that civil society and legal experts widely agreed that the previous minister's decision to terminate the Zimbabwean Exemption Permit (ZEP) programme was made without prior notice or consultation with ZEP holders and the public. READ | Constitutional Court dismisses application for leave to appeal Zimbabwe permit decision Furthermore, an invitation for representations from ZEP holders was only issued in January 2022, after the decision was announced. The Constitutional Court then dismissed an application by the home affairs minister for leave to appeal a June 2023 Gauteng High Court in Pretoria ruling that the ZEP programme had been unlawfully terminated. The court ordered the minister to meaningfully consult with the 178 000 affected permit holders, according to GroundUp.