The government is looking more and more to the private sector to plug the funding gap in water infrastructure. Estimations show the country needs about R90 billion per year over the next decade to fix infrastructure to ensure water delivery. The water and sanitation department's medium-term expenditure framework is R134.909 billion. Compounded by weak economic growth, major infrastructure challenges and ballooning municipal debt, the government has been forced to loan more money to provide running water to South African homes. So dire is the infrastructure situation an eye-watering R90 billion is needed every year over the next decade, accumulating to around R900 billion. In stark contrast, the Department of Water and Sanitation's medium-term expenditure framework is R134.909 billion. This consists of allocations of R42.604 billion, R46.362 billion and R45.941 billion in the 2024/25, 2025/26 and 2026/27 financial years, respectively. In addition to this, municipalities owe waterboards just over R21 billion as of May 2024. READ | Clean water, eradicate pit toilets - Eastern Cape residents' plea to new water and sanitation minister On Friday, new Water and Sanitation Minister Pemmy Majodina presented her department's budget vote for the 2024/25 financial year in Parliament. "Most of this funding is raised by our entity, the Trans Caledon Tunnel Authority [TCTA], based on explicit guarantees from National Treasury. "Unfortunately, due to the difficult fiscal situation in the country, the value of guarantees that National Treasury can issue to the TCTA is limited. "It is for this reason that we are establishing the National Water Resource Infrastructure Agency, which will own all the national water resource infrastructure assets and obtain the revenue streams associated with those assets. "This will enable the agency to borrow additional funds on the strength of its balance sheet," she said. ALSO READ | Partner with private sector, government tells municipalities battling with water supply issues Majodina added one of the biggest challenges in the sector currently was poor investment in water and sanitation infrastructure by municipalities. "Aging infrastructure, pipe leaks and lack of operation and maintenance, among others, are some of the main causes of high levels of non-revenue water in municipalities. "While South Africa is doing well in terms of mobilising private sector finance for investment in national water resource infrastructure, it is not doing so well in terms of private sector financing of municipal water and sanitation infrastructure. Minister of Water and Sanitation, Pemmy Majodina and Deputy Ministers, @David_Mahlobo1 and Sello Seitlholo are today tabling the Department of Water and Sanitation Budget Vote 41 to the National Assembly, Parliament, this morning. #BudgetVote2024 pic.twitter.com/pSAF9BHkF6 — Water&SanitationRSA (@DWS_RSA) July 12, 2024 "To address this, the department has put in place the Water Partnerships Office, in collaboration with the Development Bank of Southern Africa and the South African Local Government Association. "The role of the office is to provide support to municipalities to establish partnerships with the private sector," she said. According to Majodina, several municipalities owed water boards huge amounts of money from the sale of water. She said: The municipal debts to the water boards had increased to R21.3 billion by May 2024, and this poses a major risk to the financial sustainability of the whole water sector. Deputy Water and Sanitation Minister Isaac Sello Seitlholo said the department's challenges would take time to address. "It is therefore crucial that in this seventh administration, under the government of national unity, we are intensifying efforts and responding aggressively to these challenges. "As previously stated by former Minister Mchunu, the country requires about R90 billion per year for the next decade to close the water infrastructure deficit. "This means, the country's water and sanitation infrastructure require R900 billion over the next decade to be up to standard," he added. EFF MP Mathibe Rebecca Mohlala said Parliament's oversight, especially on problematic departments like water and sanitation, should be strengthened. "This process was rushed. Given the time we had, it was ineffective. Parliament must provide us enough time to consider these budget processes. The EFF rejects this process and the committee for quickly adopting the budget report for this department," she added.