New SCOA chairperson Mmusi Maimane will advocate for a leaner government structure by proposing reductions in ministerial positions and targeting unnecessary expenditure. Maimane wants enhanced budget oversight and also wants Parliament's Standing Committee on Appropriations to look into intermediary costs associated with entities like NSFAS. He will also push for a strategic overhaul, including restructuring and potentially divesting from underperforming entities to better utilise state resources. More than a week into his new role as the chairperson of Parliament's Standing Committee on Appropriations (SCOA), Mmusi Maimane, the leader of Build One South Africa (BOSA), is already setting ambitious agendas. Among his proposals is a significant reduction in the number of ministries in the economic cluster. READ | Groenewald vows to tighten prison security after inmate flaunts cushy life in viral video In an interview with News24 on Thursday, Maimane discussed various budget items he considers unnecessary and wasteful. These include expenditures on VIP protection, intermediary entities like the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS), and excessive spending on Parliament's events and catering services. Maimane argued reallocating these funds was crucial, particularly given the country's shrinking state budget and escalating debt levels. He said he believed these resources could be better utilised in other areas that were in dire need of funding. Ramaphosa's government of national unity (GNU) Cabinet includes 32 ministers, each of whom has been appointed alongside 43 deputy ministers. These ministers are each allocated at least two security protectors in Cape Town and Tshwane, the primary cities where they conduct their official duties. Additionally, they receive security coverage in their respective hometowns. Business Tech has estimated South Africans could expect to pay at least R1.2 billion annually for the Cabinet. READ | 'We are being allowed to reset': Hope and caution as bloated, reconfigured GNU Cabinet announced As SCOA chairperson, Maimane will lead MPs who serve on the committee that adjudicates over the budget. The committee's basic function is to interrogate how the government is spending taxpayer money and whether the state is achieving the desired outcome. "What I would hope to achieve in the next five years is to advocate for how we do budgeting, because we have inherited a model and all we have done is adjust that model for inflation and make cuts. But I think we need to have a serious rethink; do we need five ministries in the economy? There is just too many," Maimane said. He was expected to preside over the Appropriation Bill debate on Friday and facilitate a conversation on TB and early childhood development funding. Maimane said: Most crucially, VIP security tells South Africans that politicians are more important than the people. I think we need to adjust that. The second thing that I need us to adjust carefully is that certain entities we are funding are not giving us bang for our buck. "For example, I think [students] must be able to get quality higher education, but you have NSFAS in between. "Why are we giving money first to NSFAS, then to students, rather than funding universities directly and then students can benefit from that," Maimane said. The former leader of the opposition in Parliament, who returns as leader for what may be described as a splinter group of the DA, also has a strong view on state-owned entities (SOEs) and bailouts. "We give a lot of bailouts to SOEs - Transnet, Eskom and maybe two others. The truth is we are not getting a return on investment (ROI). "When you look at it over the last five years, the net return on investment in SOEs averages a negative 5%. In other words, we are making losses for every rand we pour into that. Accordingly, the state is not recouping that," Maimane said. He added the committee must consider structuring SOEs carefully to get ROI and sell off those where there was not a benefit. Chairing SCOA will be challenging for Maimane as he navigates the dynamics presented by the GNU and policy differences among parties.