The Public Protector has uncovered gross overspending on the official funeral of Free State MEC Tate Makgoe's funeral. Makgoe, one of the longest-serving MECs in the Free State, died in a car accident in March 2023. The investigation found that the Free State Office of the Premier had bypassed standard vetting and competitive bidding processes in appointing C-Squared, the company that got the tender for the funeral. R355 000 for "artists", R96 000 for mourners' "accreditation", R70 000 for decor, R59 000 for red roses, R13 000 for "draping", and R9 900 to hire astroturf. That's what a Public Protector report says the Free State government spent on former education MEC Tate Makgoe's funeral and memorial service. Defending itself in the report, Free State Office of the Premier director-general Kopung Ralikontsane denied any wrongdoing, saying the supply chain management properly followed the request for quotations. However, in detailing expenses, the report also stated that taxpayers forked out R159 000 for 2 000 "snack packs", R95 000 for his tombstone, R84 900 for his casket, and R46 000 for a burial plot. The "snack packs", which work out to R79.50 each, were served to students who attended the funeral. Makgoe, one of the longest-serving MECs in the Free State, died in a car accident in March last year together with his protector, Warrant Officer Vuyo Mdi. President Cyril Ramaphosa accorded Makgoe an official funeral, but in the days before the funeral, the province spent R693 892 on a memorial service at the University of Free State's South Campus for Makgoe. The costs included, among other things, R97 500 for finger food for his family and government dignitaries, R70 000 for decor, R6 000 for a red carpet, R24 000 for chair covers, and R27 500 for programmes. READ | State funerals: SIU finds invoices were doubled, interns approved inflated costs The province also paid R485 480 for what it termed an "MEC infrastructure/lunch" for activities that took place at Makgoe's house in the period between his death and funeral from 8 to 12 March 2023. This included R136 500 on food, R66 500 on "executive chairs", R34 280 on a generator for a four-day hire, R31 050 on a marquee, R20 000 on groceries, R13 500 on draping, and R16 000 on juice. The total cost of the memorial and funeral of Makgoe came to R3 432 676. At the time, the provincial government defended the extravagant spending, stating that Makgoe was popular and that his funeral was expected to draw a multitude of people. Public protector reveals irregularities But a detailed investigation report released by the Public Protector on Sunday uncovered gross mismanagement and financial extravagance in Makgoe's funeral. There were also irregularities with Mdi's funeral, which the state paid for, and which was held a day before Makgoe's. The probe was initiated after Roy Jankielsohn, leader of the DA in the province, raised concerns about a Bloemfontein-based communications and event agency's rapid and unchecked appointment as the events coordinator for high-profile funerals. In his complaint, Jankielsohn contended that the company, C-Squared, was appointed as the events coordinator and event service provider in a very short space of time, without any vetting processes being conducted, and that it was unclear whether competitive bidding processes were followed. C-Squared, of which Ben Moseme is the director, was also implicated in the Mangaung Annual Cultural Festival (Macufe) tender case, which the Hawks investigated. The matter related to an alleged multimillion-rand fraudulent tender awarded to C-Squared to organise the 2022 Macufe event. "The re-appointment of a company that has already embarrassed the Free State provincial government and tainted the image of the Mangaung Annual Cultural Festival is very suspicious," the Public Protector report read. In the report, however, Ralikontsane said there was nothing in law prohibiting them from doing business with C-Squared if the necessary supply chain processes were followed. He said if the company was not a restricted service provider on the National Treasury restricted supplier database and its central supply database, there was no problem. News24 reached out to C-Squared for comment; their response will be added if received. Memorial and funeral of Warrant Officer Mdi Mdi's funeral also formed part of the Public Protector's investigation. Mdi had been Makgoe's bodyguard since 2010. The same company, C-Squared, was appointed to arrange his funeral. Mdi was not entitled to a provincial official funeral, but the Public Protector report says that following a visit to his family by then-Premier Mxolisi Dukwana, it was discovered that his family would not be able to pay for the funeral themselves. The SA Police Service also confirmed that they could only contribute R20 000 to Mdi's funeral, which was only payable after the funeral had been conducted. In the spirit of "Ubuntu", the premier's office agreed to assist Mdi's family with funeral arrangements. READ | Free State govt defends spending R3.5m on ex-education MEC Tate Makgoe's funeral Director-general Ralikontsane approved the expenditure for the events leading up to the funerals of Makgoe and Mdi to the cost of R5 961 260. However, evidence before the Public Protector indicated “excessive and reckless” expenditures on Mdi's funeral. Some of the items that taxpayers paid for included R253 000 for catering, R42 000 for a coffin, R48 000 for a tombstone, R22 000 for transport, R9 000 for décor and R45 000 for big stage screens. The Public Protector said that no evidence could be found that any approval had been sought for Mdi's funeral expenses and "accordingly, the approximate amount of R1 000 000 spent towards Mdi's funeral cannot be justified". Public Protector findings The Public Protector's investigation found that the procurement process violated constitutional and legislative standards, including the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). This was due to bidders' incorrect scoring, non-compliance with regulations, and a lack of transparency in the evaluation and adjudication process. The investigation highlighted that the urgent nature of the procurement process led to unnecessary and excessive spending. The findings indicated improper conduct and maladministration in handling the funeral arrangements and expenditures. As a result of these findings, the Public Protector has recommended several remedial actions to address the issues identified: The Presidency must review the funeral policy in consultation with the National Treasury within 120 calendar days of the report's release. The director-general of the National Treasury is instructed to acknowledge the findings of this report as per the powers granted under section 6(1)(f) and (g) of the PFMA. The premier is required to take disciplinary action against Kopung Ralikontsane, the director-general, within 90 calendar days following the report for failing to fulfil his duties under section 38 of the PFMA.