Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi is the chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa). While he wanted several positions in Parliament's finance cluster, Zibi ended up leading Scopa. Being new to Parliament, Zibi believes he is up to the task. Less than 18 months ago, Rise Mzansi leader Songezo Zibi was scribbling potential policies on a piece of paper. He had very little input, and money was tight. Zibi had the mammoth task of starting a new political venture and had to stand out in the sea of political party options facing South African voters. But in the months leading up to the 2024 general election, support grew, and money started flowing. Most notably, a R15-million donation from an ultra-rich Oppenheimer family member boosted the party’s operations. From his very bare office, Zibi spoke frankly about the party's finances and the resources it had to plan an election. "When you start, you start with a sheet of paper, with nothing. No people, no money, no manifesto, no structures… nothing. To be honest, it's a big surprise that we are even here in Parliament. It's damn hard. Even though we got fewer seats than we thought we would get," he said. READ | ActionSA's Athol Trollip fumes over Scopa position snub Rebecca Oppenheimer was the person who donated R15 million to the party. Oppenheimer is the daughter of Mary Slack, who in turn is the daughter of South African industrialist Harry Oppenheimer, and the heir to the Anglo-American and De Beers fortune. She also donated R15 million to the DA in the previous quarter. In 2021, News24 reported that Slack's daughters – Jessica Slack Jell, Rebecca [Oppenheimer] and Victoria Freudenheim – donated a combined R10 million to ActionSA in the second quarter of that year. On election day, Rise Mzansi walked away with 0.42% of the national vote, securing two seats in the National Assembly. Describing himself as a university freshman, Zibi now occupies one of the most powerful positions in Parliament. I've just concluded a handover meeting with the former Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA), Deputy Minister @MkhulekoHlengwa.It was a short but fruitful meeting.There is a lot work to be done but there is also great opportunity in restoring public… pic.twitter.com/Lbhtlsox0s — Songezo Zibi (@SongezoZibi) July 16, 2024 A week ago, he was elected chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) – a crucial portfolio known for toppling Cabinet ministers and exposing major scandals in the past. Speaking to News24, Zibi said that being in the position is overwhelming. He said: It feels like being sort of like your freshman year adversity, you know, like the first few weeks at varsity where you don't know where the lecture rooms are and you don't know where things are. I mean, this place is a maze just to find a way to understand the procedures here, that sort of thing. So it's actually been a bit overwhelming from that perspective because there's a way of doing things here that I'm obviously not used to. Zibi, a former associate editor of the Financial Mail and former editor of Business Day, said he is prepared for what lies ahead. "The scope of responsibility is a massive one. But I also think there is a reason why, you know, quite a few political parties also felt that you know, maybe I should assume that responsibility as well. So, yeah, it is an honour, but it's a big job," he said. Zibi and Makashule Gana are the two Rise Mzansi MPs. The former highlighted how he came to occupy the position of Scopa chairperson. "The ANC reached out to us, by the way, about the GNU. There were a few conversations. We actually didn't talk about Scopa until right at the end, as in like when Parliament had been constituted already. We had two phases of our participation in the whole process. "We said to the ANC that priority number one was to get to a point with a Speaker, deputy Speaker and a president. Because that allows for a government to be formed. There has to be a Parliament, and we elect a president and that sort of thing. We did not discuss anything else with them apart from that," he said. ALSO READ | 'No better honour than privilege of owning yourself': Why Rise Mzansi refused major donations Contrary to voting with other GNU partners, Zibi and Gana voted for the EFF's Veronica Mente to become Speaker of the National Assembly. "When we had the election of the speaker, deputy speaker, we voted for Cyril as president. We voted for Mente as Speaker. We took an independent view out of that," he said. Zibi believed that the Speaker shouldn't have come from the ANC or the DA, "as the two dominant parties in the government of national unity". When the negotiations between all the parties were somewhat concluded, Zibi indicated they wanted positions on the finance, Scopa and trade and industry committees. "We kind of looked at our respective strengths and experience. And we chose roles that we felt we needed support for. We ended up with Scopa, basically. But it really could have been any of the three, to be honest with you. So, it was never a thing from the get-go that these are the positions we want," he said. #KnowYourMPMr @SongezoZibi has been elected as the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. #7thParliament #30YearsofDemocracy #30YearsofDemocraticParliament pic.twitter.com/l5mQAxXFAl — Parliament of RSA (@ParliamentofRSA) July 11, 2024 Zibi has made it clear that he is not there to protect the ANC. "We didn't have that discussion. We don't have to keep the ANC happy. The ANC will have two choices. The hearings of the committee are generally public, and it becomes apparent in those who want to do an honest inquiry and who don't. "The second thing is that, unlike before, where even though the chair was from an opposition party, the ANC had the majority of members anyway. That's not the case now. So, there is no universe where the ANC is going to get its way. They must convince the EFF and the DA," he said. Asked about his ascension to lead Scopa, Zibi said it was not a win just for the opposition. "It's a win for the idea that South Africa can begin moving past the ANC and the old parties. Because the political leadership has been defined almost exclusively in terms of the ANC and ANC politics," he said.