The DA and ANC in Gauteng are failing to reach consensus in forming a government of provincial unity. On Tuesday, the DA accused the ANC of negotiating in bad faith and of trying to trick it into accepting less positions. The ANC will hold a media briefing on Wednesday to give an update. The ANC will not dictate to the DA in their negotiations towards the formation of a government of provincial unity (GPU) in Gauteng, according to DA federal council chairperson, Helen Zille. Gauteng is the only province that has not yet formed a government. Flanked by the DA's Gauteng leader, Solly Msimanga, Zille was addressing the media on Tuesday on the deadlock the two parties had reached in their negotiations. This comes after Gauteng Premier Panyaza Lesufi postponed the announcement of his cabinet on Monday due to the deadlock. The national leadership of the two parties has now stepped in to try to find a solution to the impasse. At the media briefing, Zille accused the ANC in Gauteng of negotiating in bad faith and said it had failed to acknowledge the government of national unity's statement of intent, which was there to guide parties in forming a government. Zille and national ANC leaders, including secretary-general Fikile Mbalula, participated in the Gauteng negotiations on Tuesday. "Despite some progress in negotiations today, the DA and ANC have not yet reached agreement on the composition of a government for Gauteng on the basis of the national statement of intent, signed on June 14," said Zille. READ | 'We will not be dictated to' says Zille as DA and ANC fail to form a PGU in Gauteng At the heart of the disagreements between the two parties, she said, was the ANC's failure to acknowledge two "crucial" clauses in the statement of intent. One is Clause 16, which deals with the principle of proportionality, inclusivity, and respecting the outcome of the election in forming a government. The other is Clause 19, which defines the principle of sufficient consensus in terms of which decisions will be taken in government. Zille was crucial in drafting the statement of intent, which it relied on in fighting for positions in President Cyril Ramaphosa's Cabinet. Nationally, 12 DA members, including party leader John Steenhuisen, are now a part of the executive. But in Gauteng, Zille said, the ANC wanted to offer the DA three out of 10 cabinet positions and refused to say how many seats it would be taking for itself or how many would be given to other parties. "This approach was not conducive to building an atmosphere of trust. We wanted clarity on these issues," she said. Zille added: The ANC, today, conceded that they had intended to allocate three Cabinet seats to the DA and keep seven, plus the premier. That is eight [seats] for themselves. Now, clearly, that would be a violation of the proportionality clause; it would not be proportional, not even wildly. It would [also] not reflect the will of the voters, and it would not reflect inclusiveness. So, it was completely [not in line] with Clause 16 of the statement of intent. "We said, 'Sorry, eight to three is not acceptable.' Today, they did agree to go down from seven including the premier to six plus premier, which would be seven out of 11, and give one seat to the IFP and keep us at three," she said. Zille said the DA had no problem with the IFP being part of the GPU in Gauteng. She said the IFP was not only the initial signatory to the statement of intent but had helped the DA be a part of the government in KwaZulu-Natal. "So, we have no problem at all. But it is still widely out of proportion to give the ANC six plus one and the DA three, which is half of what the ANC has got, although we are almost the same size electorally," Zille added. "We welcome the IFP's possible inclusion, but [I want to] point out that this is still far short of the requirements of Clause 16 of the national statement of intent," she said. In the general elections, the ANC obtained 34% of the votes, while the DA won 28%. Zille said no one had won the elections in Gauteng and that the ANC could therefore not dictate to the DA. Instead, it needed to treat them as equal partners. "The ANC's position also illustrated that their refusal to discuss with us which other parties they wished to include was a smokescreen to hide the fact that they were planning to allocate a full seven to themselves while leaving us with three. "Allocating more than double the number of executive positions to the ANC compared to the DA does not reflect the election outcome, nor is it broadly proportional, nor is it inclusive," she said. ? No Deal in Gauteng, but the DA remains committed.@helenzille, @SollyMsimanga and @FredNelDA addressed the media on the ongoing negotiations in Gauteng. Despite progress, no agreement with the ANC on forming a Government of Provincial Unity in Gauteng has yet been reached.… pic.twitter.com/vFTm7UUO3y — DA Gauteng (@DAGauteng) July 2, 2024 Zille added that the DA was prepared to enter into a GPU in Gauteng as a "power-sharing partnership" to reflect the voters' will. She said: We are not prepared to be co-opted by the ANC on their own terms, acting as if it still has an overall majority in Gauteng, which it does not. We cannot agree to be taken hostage in a government of provincial unity in which only one party dictates the terms. "Our door remains open to further negotiation when the ANC is genuinely committed to treating us as a party that is almost the same size as they are in Gauteng. We will, again, come to the table in an atmosphere of mutual respect and negotiate in good faith and seek to build trust between the parties. "I will clear my diary and do whatever it takes to get back into a room where people are prepared to negotiate in good faith and reflect the will of the voters and the agreement that we signed on 14 June. So that means we have to get a fair share of government, and we have to ensure that we are not treated as an add-on but as a respected partner that voters voted for in significant numbers," she added. Msimanga said the DA had yet to close the door on the ANC. However, he added that if the ANC saw their demands to do things according to the statement of intent as an "end of the road," the DA in Gauteng was ready to occupy the opposition benches. He pointed out that the disagreements between the two parties in Gauteng had no bearing on the government of national unity or the KwaZulu-Natal government. READ | 'DA is behaving like a spoilt brat,' says Maile as Lesufi delays Gauteng Cabinet announcement again "The agreement nationally remains as is. As things stand, there has not been any adjustment at a national or provincial (KwaZulu-Natal) level," said Msimanga. Msimanga also revealed that the DA had asked for the infrastructure portfolio as well as cooperative governance and traditional affairs, education or health. The party was also interested in transport, economic development and agriculture. However, he said the ANC had not said which portfolios would be allocated to the DA. On Monday, the ANC leadership in Gauteng accused the DA of bullying it and acting like a "spoilt brat" during negotiations. ANC provincial secretary TK Nciza, the party's head of elections Lebogang Maile, and deputy provincial secretary Tasneem Motara addressed the media on Monday evening to announce that Lesufi would no longer announce his cabinet because of disagreements with the DA. At that briefing, Nciza said the DA was negotiating in bad faith. He said the DA was opposed to the inclusion of other political parties in the GPU, which the two parties "fundamentally disagreed" on. The ANC is expected to hold another media briefing at Luthuli House on Wednesday to provide updates.