Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen delivered his maiden budget vote speech on Tuesday. Steenhuisen said his priorities were food security, funding small farmers, and tracking and tracing animals. The House chairs had to deal with constant points of order and heckling from EFF and MK Party members. Agriculture Minister John Steenhuisen said feeding the nation "remains a critical national security" matter and will continue to be the focus of the department, even in the seventh administration. Delivering his budget vote speech on Tuesday, Steenhuisen said part of the department's objectives concerning food security included focusing on the affordability and quality of food available to citizens. His maiden address, however, was characterised by heckling, endless points of order and political jabs. "To enhance food security and ensure the stability of food production, steps will have to be taken to protect agricultural land in South Africa. If we lose fertile and rich agricultural land, it will have a detrimental impact on the ability to produce enough food to feed our nation," said Steenhuisen. He added that he would work with other government departments that have a direct impact on agriculture, such as transport, police and water. "I intend to knock on all their doors so that working together, in a transversal way, we can really unlock the potential of the agriculture sector as an engine room for job creation, economic growth, and the development of the rural economy. I intend to make sure that our farmers, farmworkers and the sector have the loudest voices in the room, working in their corner," said Steenhuisen. READ | While some laud Steenhuisen as agriculture minister, others deride appointment of 'matriculant' Again, as with other budget vote speeches and previous committee meetings, the challenge of insufficient translators was raised by EFF and MK Party MPs. They said they could not follow the proceedings well because the only available translations were in English and Afrikaans. The standard response from House chairs was the same: simultaneous mini-plenaries were taking place, and Parliament could only have translators for other languages in a few plenaries. Steenhuisen began his budget vote on a lighter note, referring to the reaction from South Africans on social media after President Cyril Ramaphosa announced him as the agriculture minister. "South Africa reacted in [a] typical fashion. There were memes of me wearing tight-fitting shorts and veldskoene (field shoes), pictures of me riding tractors and horses, and of course the teasing renaming of me as John Deere," he said. It was a great honour to deliver my first budget and policy speech in the National Assembly this morning. I will be on the sector's side as together we open more gates of opportunity for our farmers, farmworkers and sectoral partners. ????#LetsGrowTogether pic.twitter.com/rKzEB96Ly0 — John Steenhuisen MP (@jsteenhuisen) July 16, 2024 He said some of his department's key priorities would include food security, funding farmers and biosecurity. Steenhuisen said biosecurity was a challenge for the sector, especially in the poultry and livestock subsector. He said the avian flu and foot-and-mouth disease outbreaks were a significant risk to local production and export potential, which was why "it is an area where greater focus is going to have to be given". Steenhuisen said that, in addition to vaccines and medicines that treat outbreaks, there needed to be a focus on prevention. "In this light, the department will be focusing on a new track and trace system for the movement of animals around the country. This is becoming necessary because international export markets and trade organisations are rapidly moving to systems where trade will only be possible with livestock products if such product can be traced to its origin." He added: We must move swiftly in this regard. I also believe that in addition to assisting with biosecurity, a track and trace system of livestock could assist in the combatting of stock theft as each animal will be uniquely traceable to the original owner, and the chain of successive movements of that animal will be recorded. He added that his department would also empower new entrant farmers to become self-sustainable and productive. "The greatest asset the department, and indeed our country, has is the incredible farmers and farmworkers of our nation. They are world-class producers and rank among the best in the world. They need our thanks, they need our support, and they need us on their side," he said. He said it was disappointing that, according to portfolio committee and oversight reports, farmers did not receive money meant to support them in some instances. The department would look into other ways of allocating grants to farmers to ensure it reached them, and that it had an impact. Steenhuisen said: It is crucial that farmers benefitting from these grants appear on a database. Going forward, funding will only flow to provinces with proper planning and accountability, and payments will be made quarterly contingent on proper reporting against targets. I also take note of SIU [Special Investigation Unit] reports on conditional grants, which will receive my full and urgent attention. READ | 'No dissenting voice': Ramaphosa's GNU executive emerges united after first Cabinet lekgotla Responding to Steenhuisen's budget vote speech, ActionSA's Athol Trollip told the minister that some of his plans should also revive agriculture production and economic growth in small and rural towns. He said the lack of this was leading people living in these areas to go to urban cities to look for employment. "Our rural economy is against the ropes. Small towns are falling apart, and this is fanning an unparallel urbanisation rate of desperate job seekers who leave behind, in rural areas, dislocated families and households awaiting meagre remittances." Trollip said: Most of those who make it to the cities end up living on the outskirts in desperate twilight zones of socio-economic misery, unable to support their families or return home. Your targets, honourable minister, of increased agricultural production and economic growth must materialise to turn this around. Rise Mzansi's Songezo Zibi said it was unfortunate that the department's budget had been cut again, adding that it was a blow for smaller landowners who work the land every day to make a living. Zibi said the department needed to do a few things in order for South Africans living in rural and urban areas to live prosperous and dignified lives. Among this, Zibi said, was the provision of water to every home in rural areas. "This means the provision of water to every home will enable rural residents to use the land they have to produce their own food, with the support of the government, especially in terms of crop choices, modern seeds and other modern farming methods that help them put food on the table," he said.