In the sixth administration, President Cyril Ramaphosa had four ministers reporting to him. The government of national unity Cabinet saw this number decrease to three after the Ministry of Electricity and Energy was made a standalone ministry. However the number of deputy ministers has increased. Governance expert Professor William Gumede believes that by appointing ministers in his office, Ramaphosa is creating a parallel Cabinet, and it shows he does not have confidence in his ministers. To help him steer South Africa under the government of national unity (GNU), President Cyril Ramaphosa has doubled down on the super Presidency he started during the sixth administration. It is said that a captain is only as good as his crew. The question is whether Ramaphosa has surrounded himself with the right men and women to be his eyes and ears in his office. In 2023, Ramaphosa was criticised for establishing a "super" Presidency occupied by those close to him to monitor projects he wanted to keep his eye on, including energy and state security. The formation of a GNU-inclusive Cabinet has seen a decrease in the number of ministers in the Presidency, a merging of departments, and some new faces – but it has not stopped the president from keeping some of his most loyal ministers close to him. In the sixth administration, Ramaphosa had four ministers reporting to him, including Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni, Minister in the Presidency for Women, Youth, and Persons With Disabilities Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Minister in the Presidency for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Maropene Ramokgopa, and Electricity and Energy Minister Kgosientsho Ramokgopa. Minister in the Presidency, Khumbudzo Ntshavheni, and her two deputies, Nonceba Mhlauli and Kenneth Morolong. News24 Graphic by Sharlene Roodt/News24 Ntshavheni took over from Mondli Gungubele, a former trade union leader and educator, who was shifted to digital technologies in March 2023. She had acted in the position after the death of Minister Jackson Mthembu and played a crucial role in communicating and coordinating the government's message at the peak of the Covid-19 pandemic and July 2021 unrest. Pinky Kekana, now the Deputy Minister of Public Service and Administration, previously served as Ramokgopa's deputy in the planning, monitoring and evaluation portfolio. In 2021, Ramaphosa abolished the Department of State Security and moved political responsibility for the State Security Agency to the Minister in the Presidency – Ntshavheni. READ | 'We are being allowed to reset': Hope and caution as bloated, reconfigured GNU Cabinet announced Before it was done away with, the department was headed by Minister Ayanda Dlodlo, who was moved to public service and administration after intelligence failures relating to the deadly July 2021 unrest. Disgraced MP Zizi Kodwa remained as her deputy until he was appointed Minister of Sports, Arts, and Culture. He resigned from his ministerial position in June after he was charged with corruption. Kgosientsho Ramokgopa was also appointed last year. He did not have a deputy. The president had initially announced the creation of a Minister of Electricity in the Presidency during the State of the Nation Address (SONA) in Cape Town in February 2023. "To deal more effectively and urgently with the challenges that confront us, I will appoint a minister of electricity in the Presidency to The response was backlash against his bloated Presidency. Minister of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, Sindisiwe Chikunga, and her deputy, Mmapaseka Steve Letsike. (Graphic by Sharlene Roodt/News24) On Sunday, 30 June, Ramaphosa unveiled a bloated and dramatically reconfigured government comprising 32 ministers and 43 deputy ministers, inclusive of GNU partners. After losing power in the May general elections, the ANC co-governs South Africa with the DA, Patriotic Alliance, IFP, GOOD, PAC, FF Plus, UDM, Al Jama-ah, Rise Mzansi, and the United Africans Transformation. In his announcement, Ramaphosa confirmed that the Ministry of Public Enterprise would cease to exist and that the coordination of relevant public enterprises would be located in the Presidency during the implementation process of a new shareholder model. Shortly after the announcement, News24 reported that trusted Ramaphosa ally Maropene Ramokgopa was responsible for overseeing the establishment of a state-holding company for state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and the companies previously supervised by the Department of Public Enterprises will be shifted to their policy departments. This means that the Minister of Energy and Electricity will now be Eskom's shareholder representative, and Minister of Transport Barbara Creecy will take charge of Transnet. READ | Presidency clarifies future of Eskom, Transnet Ntshavheni, one of Ramaphosa's closest lieutenants, was appointed in March 2023. She hails from Limpopo and is responsible for State Security, the Government Communication and Information System, Statistics South Africa, and anything else Ramaphosa assigns her. Previously, she was minister of communications and digital technologies and minister of small business development, among other roles. According to the Presidency, she holds an MBA degree from the University of Bradford, United Kingdom. Ntshavheni's deputies, Kenneth Morolong and Nonceba Mhlauli, are no strangers to the office. Morolong was appointed to the position in March 2023. READ | How Ramaphosa has bloated his presidency Before serving in the Cabinet, Morolong was a member of Parliament's Standing Committee on Finance and an alternate member of the Standing Committee on Appropriations. He is from the North West province. Mhlauli is also a familiar face in the Presidency. She served in the office between 2019 and 2023. In December 2022, Mhlauli, who holds a Master of Arts degree in African Language Studies and Politics from Rhodes University, was elected to serve in the ANC's national executive and working committees. She has experience in the national government sphere. Maropene Ramokgopa also assumed her role in March 2023. The appointment came shortly after she was elected the second deputy secretary-general of the ANC in December 2022. Minister of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, Maropene Ramokgopa, and her deputy, Seiso Mohai. (Graphic by Sharlene Roodt/News24) Born in Polokwane, she is a qualified policymaker and diplomat with experience in economic diplomacy, multilateral diplomacy, and diplomatic advisory roles. According to the government, she served as a manager of stakeholders in the office of the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation between 2014 and 2016. Between 2016 and 2019, she was the consul-general in Mumbai and also served two consecutive terms as the treasurer of the consular corps in Mumbai. Ramokgopa's deputy, Seiso Mohai, is also an experienced politician from the Free State. He is currently the chief whip of the ANC in the National Council of Provinces. He previously served in the Free State legislature and has been a member of the National Assembly for eight years. READ | GNU executive a fresh start, says Ramaphosa as ministers vow to rise above petty politics Sindisiwe Chikunga, the former Minister of Transport, is the new Minister of Women, Youth, and Persons with Disabilities. She previously served as the Deputy Minister of Transport twice, and as the Deputy Minister of Public service and Administration. Her current post could be seen as a demotion for her, from her previous position at the helm of a portfolio as powerful as transport. According to Parliament, Chikunga has served as a member of various committees, including correctional services, the joint budget portfolio, housing, the Auditor-General, and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence. She was the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police. Her deputy, human rights activist Mmapaseka Steve Letsike, hails from Atteridgeville in Gauteng. According to Sonke Gender Justice, the prominent leader has more than 15 years of high-level experience in international policy and human rights. Letsike is the co-chair of the South African National Aids Council (Sanac) and the national task team established by the Department of Justice to address hate crimes and gender-based violence (GBV). She also co-chairs the Commonwealth Equality Network with more than 53 commonwealth country members, is a member of the Global UN Women LGBTI reference group and the Southern Africa UN Women Civil Society Advisory Group, among other responsibilities. READ | Khaya Sithole: The cost of a more accountable Cabinet Governance expert Professor William Gumede said ministers in the Presidency are "unheard of" in other countries. He said: It causes more duplication and chaos because you have ministers and then ministers in the Presidency. When you are the president, you are decisive; you tell people what to do, and they do it. You don't second guess them and say you think you will have it in your office. The appointments, said Gumede, were tantamount to votes of no confidence against some of his own ministries. He added: "He is creating a parallel Cabinet inside the Presidency, which will cause more inefficiencies and duplication, and he undermines himself because the other ministers can see what he is doing." Ramaphosa is not the only president to make such appointments. Gumede said former president Jacob Zuma did the same. "My sense is that at the end of the day, every minister is going to do their own thing. I think the non-ANC ministers are going to perform because they are more eager beavers and keen to deliver." Asked why he surrounded himself with women leaders, Gumede explained that, "In our country, most of the men are just there for power, but they do not work hard. You will most likely get more out of women than men because they are more hard-working and honest." READ | ANC chief whip Mdumiseni Ntuli warns GNU partners to act as a unit led by Ramaphosa Political analyst Susan Booysen said when Ramaphosa took office she thought it was important for him to surround himself with trusted ministers. "When he had just taken over from Zuma there were lots of doubts as to who was on whose side, and he had not yet won over everybody and so to get his programmes seen to, he created what I called at the time, a parallel administration that he really needed." Booysen said there would always be doubts in government. "But the game has changed, and I think he knows very well by now who is loyal to him and who is not, and so he does not need them in the same way that he used to," she added.