The Public Service Commission (PSC) has welcomed the formation of the seventh administration. It called on public servants to work with newly appointed ministers, despite them coming from different political parties. The PSC has called on state employees to exercise great care and work diligently in service of the country. The Public Service Commission (PSC) has called on state employees to work diligently with new ministers who come from different political parties. On Monday, the PSC published its quarterly Pulse of the Public Service report wherein it outlined laws defining the public service's role. During a press briefing in Pretoria, its commissioner, Anele Gxoyiya, welcomed the government of national unity (GNU), which included 11 political parties with ministerial appointments for eight of them, and called on public servants to get behind the seventh administration. "Public servants and other organs of the state must play a critical role in supporting the transition and ensuring continuity of quality service delivery. "Furthermore, public servants are expected to serve and support the newly elected leadership and government of the day in a dedicated, competent and professional manner in executing priority policies," Gxoyiya said. READ | Popcru demands consultation in new government appointments The PSC urged the following be taken into account during this transition: Ethical leadership. Loyalty and support to the government of the day. Political/administrative interface. Professionalisation of the state: building capacity for progress. According to Gxoyiya, the public service should show an unwavering commitment to upholding the highest standards of professionalism and integrity. This includes a zero-tolerance policy towards corruption or malfeasance. "Civil servants are reminded of their duty to serve the people with honesty, diligence and humility. "Transparency and accountability must be embedded in the fabric of government operations, ensuring that decisions are made in the best interests of the nation. "A need for continuous innovation and improvement, as the challenges facing South Africa require bold and forward-thinking solutions," Gxoyiya said. Furthermore, he added, the GNU marked a significant moment in the nation's journey towards an accountable and transparent governance. He said: A more serious warning should go to the entire public service to rethink how it engages with citizens, but most importantly to ensure it is guided by the values and principles governing the public administration. "Such a public service will reinforce citizen's trust in the constitutional democracy. It is further a call to citizens to be vigilant and hold government accountable for service delivery," he said. Gxoyiya added integrity by officials meant promoting a culture of accountability, transparency, and ethical conduct. The PSC noted the recent action by SARS and Road Traffic Management Corporation officials who refused to take a bribe at the Beitbridge port of entry. "The PSC would like to encourage all public servants across the country to uphold the constitutional values and principles which call for professional ethics and accountability. "These actions will contribute towards building a professional, ethical, and capable public service," Gxoyiya said.