Several parliamentary committees have elected their chairpersons. Former North West premier Supra Mahumapelo and former Cabinet minister Joe Maswanganyi returned to their parliamentary positions. Several committees are expected to continue electing their chairpersons. A premier who once defended the infamous Gupta family, a Cabinet minister accused of corruption, and a deputy minister who has suffered a brutal demotion. These are just some of the politicians who were elected to lead some of Parliament's crucial portfolio committees on Tuesday. There was some good news for the DA as well after Leon Basson was elected to lead the Water and Sanitation Portfolio Committee. On Tuesday, several committees elected their chairpersons. Former North West premier Supra Mahumapelo was re-elected to lead the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation. Mahumapelo served in the same position in the sixth administration. During his days as premier and ANC chairperson in the North West, he earned himself a dominant spot among staunch supporters and defenders of then-president Jacob Zuma. He emphasised over and over that corruption existed but not state capture. READ | Hlophe seconds: MK Party parliamentary leader elected to Judicial Service Commission In 2017, Mahumapelo challenged South Africans to open criminal cases against the controversial Gupta family and to stop confusing corruption with state capture. The DA, in 2019, laid corruption charges against former ministers Lynne Brown and Dipuo Peters as well as Mahumapelo and former officials at South African Express (SAX). Then DA spokesperson on public enterprise, Natasha Mazzone, based her complaint on explosive testimony that was heard before the Zondo Commission, which implicated Brown, the minister of state enterprises at the time, and Peters, the former minister of transport, as the alleged recipients of bribes. This is related to a contract of R400 million between SAX and the North West government, of which Mahumapelo was the premier. Another corruption-accused MP who is leading a committee is Joe Maswanganyi, who now leads the Portfolio Committee on Finance. In 2023, Parliament's Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests found Maswanganyi "failed to understand his role as the minister of transport" when he failed to appoint a new board for the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) in 2017. Joe Maswanganyi leads the Portfolio Committee on Finance. (Liesl Peyper/News24) News24 Maswanganyi was minister from April 2017 to February 2018 in Zuma's Cabinet. On 13 June 2023, the committee said, in response to a complaint it received against the MP, it would recommend to Parliament Maswanganyi should be suspended from "his seat in all parliamentary debates and sittings, and from committee meetings and committee-related functions and operations from 10 October 2023 to 1 December 2023". Commuter activist organisation #UniteBehind laid complaints against six MPs, including Maswanganyi, in August 2022, saying they were involved in allowing Prasa to slide into ruin and should be held to account. One of the biggest government of national unity casualties is former deputy health minister Sibongiseni Dhlomo. Dhlomo has been demoted to chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health, the same position he served in before he was promoted to deputy minister. Dhlomo was accused of sexually assaulting a parliamentary staffer at his state-provided home in Rondebosch, Cape Town, last September. Sibongiseni Dhlomo was demoted following sexual assault allegations. (Jan Gerber/News24) News24 The complainant is a male parliamentary researcher and works for an opposition party. READ | PSC warns new Cabinet ministers against firing incumbent DGs on basis of politics According to the complainant, Dhlomo groped him after he was led to his bedroom. This was reportedly not the first time he tried to lure the man to his house. At the time, national Department of Health spokesperson Foster Mohale said Dhlomo took the investigation seriously and would allow the investigation process to unfold. In the Portfolio Committee on Justice, ANC MP Xola Nqola was elected chairperson. The National Assembly's portfolio committees have elected their chairpersons. (Jaco Marais/Netwerk24) Netwerk24 Most notably, MK Party parliamentary leader John Hlophe is part of the committee together with EFF MP and former Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane. In the National Council of Provinces, newcomer IFP MP Poobalan Govender was elected deputy chairperson of the council. Committees are expected to continue electing their chairpersons on Wednesday.