DA leader John Steenhuisen has called on parties in the government of national unity to work together. The DA secured six minister and six deputy minister positions in the GNU, after receiving 20% of the vote in the election. Steenhuisen will serve as minister of agriculture. DA leader John Steenhuisen has called on parties in the government of national unity (GNU) to collaborate and desist from finger-pointing about the country’s problems. Steenhuisen, who will be minister of agriculture in the GNU, delivered an address on Monday following President Cyril Ramaphosa's Cabinet announcement on Sunday night. The DA walked away as the biggest winner among a number of former opposition parties, securing six minister and six deputy minister positions, after receiving 20% of the vote in the election, the second highest behind the ANC. Apart from the agriculture portfolio, former DA chief whip Siviwe Gwarube is the new basic education minister, and the new minister of public works and infrastructure is Dean Macpherson. READ | Two ANC ministers demoted as DA secures six ministers, six deputy ministers in new-look Cabinet The minister of home affairs is Leon Schreiber, Dion George takes over as minister of forestry, fisheries and the environment, while the new communications and digital technologies minister is Solly Malatsi. The DA has also assumed deputy minister posts in the following portfolios: Finance; Trade, industry and competition; Higher education; Energy and electricity; Water and sanitation; and Small business development. The DA helped to elect Ramaphosa as president, Thoko Didiza as speaker of the National Assembly, and its own Annelie Lotriet as deputy speaker. "The appointment of Cabinet and the agreement between the two biggest parties inside the government of national unity paves the way for us to now start delivering for the people of South Africa," Steenhuisen said. He added that the DA would now have the influence in basic and higher education to focus like a "laser beam" on improving the quality of education children and students. "Our representation in the communication portfolio, alongside the deputy positions in water and sanitation, as well as energy and electricity, enables the DA to contribute to the improvement of these critical services," he said. "The sheer weight and spread of these 12 portfolios amount to a recognition that the DA has a meaningful and vital role to play in the reconstruction of our country. The DA was never in this for positions for their own sake, which is why we refused to accept watered-down compromises, and why we drove a hard bargain at times to ensure that the portfolios we get are of real substance." The configuration we have managed to negotiate ensures that, alongside the ANC, the DA is the only other party that is now represented across every one of the clusters in government. - @jsteenhuisen#RescueSA #GNU #Cabinet — Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) July 1, 2024 According to Steenhuisen, the time for collaboration has arrived. "Whether you are a businessperson, a civil society activist, a union leader, a neighbourhood watch member, or simply a citizen with skills or time to contribute, now is the time to reach out to your elected representatives to help us build our country. Where the DA is in government, you will be welcomed with an open door and an open hand. Because we know that the time for confrontation is over," he said. Steenhuisen added that politicians and political parties had not created the GNU. "It is the people of South Africa who created it, when they voted to take away the ANC's outright majority, while growing the DA's position as the second biggest party in the country. But it is now also up to all of us - including the voters who created this multiparty government - to ensure that it delivers on its promise."