Despite a signed national statement of intent between the ANC, DA and nine other parties, in Tshwane, the ANC is planning to remove the DA mayor. The ANC said the mayor was not doing his duty, while the DA claimed the ANC was upset about a new law on contractors. The DA accused the ANC of protecting private interests linked to City contracts, while the ANC said this was about uplifting small businesses. The DA may have clapped for President Cyril Ramaphosa during the Opening of Parliament under the government of national unity (GNU) on Thursday evening, but the kinship has not trickled down to the City of Tshwane. On Friday morning, the ANC Tshwane caucus said it was gearing up for a motion of no confidence in DA Mayor Cilliers Brink at the next council sitting this month. During a press briefing, the ANC Tshwane regional secretary George Matjila said the party was not in an alliance with the DA, despite the GNU. "The ANC is not in alliance with DA. At the national level, the ANC could not pass the 40% Rubicon and invited all [other parties] to be part of the GNU. Most people forget the ANC has more numbers here [in Tshwane]," he added. Matjila said the ANC would not bring forward a motion unless it was confident it had the numbers. ANC regional chairperson and Tshwane caucus leader Eugene "Bonzo" Modise added the motion in the mayor was brought up because service delivery was crumbling under Brink's leadership. The party specifically pointed to water delivery and waste removal. The ANC said the City had pulled service delivery in black and impoverished areas. This after the City announced new waste collection rules for compactor trucks and other waste removal vehicles. They include: The vehicles must not be older than nine years old and need to be roadworthy. The waste removal vehicles need to have tracking devices. They must have e-Natis documents. The ANC said it was happy to comply with rules two and three but that taking older, roadworthy vehicles out of circulation was depriving small business owners of a means to put food on the table. However, the DA contended the ANC in Tshwane was upset because it had private business interests in companies contracted to the City. READ | Tech outage hits City of Tshwane, banks, SAA, FlySafair and many others Finance MMC and DA councillor Jacqui Uys said the motion of no confidence was motivated by self-interests. She said the new rules did not seek to take business away from black business owners. Uys told the media in a briefing an hour after the ANC briefing began Matjila was upset because he had his own trucks. She said the new rules led to 60% of the waste removal vehicles being pulled from service. Uys also claimed Matjila had called her to complain about the new rules, saying he threatened to file a motion in the mayor if the municipality continued with these rules. The standoff between the City and waste removal contractors led to service disruption in Tshwane, as contractors and subcontractors closed waste dumps and threatened City drivers. Uys said the DA believed the motion had everything to do with self-interest. She said: The national mood is one of working together, but the ANC in Gauteng and Tshwane especially is not [collegial]. She added the party had no faith the motion would carry and believed smaller parties would work with the DA. When News24 asked Matjila about the allegations the motion was driven by the waste removal rules and the damage to his own purse and not because of Brink's leadership, he said if Uys was making the allegations, she must prove them. He also called her "crazy" several times. "I don't have a contract with the City. She's responsible for the City - if she wants to know my dealings, she's mad - it's not her business," Matjila said. When asked if he had any trucks working to provide service to the City, he did not give a straight answer. Matjila was also asked whether he was a subcontractor, and he responded by saying: "As to whether I've got a blue tracksuit or a black tracksuit - it's none of [Uys'] business." READ | Tshwane switches off lights in Laudium to recoup over R120 million owed by defaulting residents Meanwhile, outside Tshwane House, a group of waste removal truck contractors and sub-contractors stood waiting to speak to Brink. They told News24 a new waste removal vehicle costed R2 million, and they could not afford to upgrade their current vehicles. Speaking on condition of anonymity, a contractor said his nine vehicles were no longer on the road, adding that means 45 people would lose their jobs. Another contractor added the group was not linked to politics, saying by subcontracting his trucks, he was able to uplift the community. Of his 13 vehicles, only five now meet the new requirements.