After much speculation, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced his Cabinet on Sunday. There are several new and opposition faces in the national executive constituted as a government of national unity. The DA, the second largest party in the country, walked away with most ministerial positions among opposition parties. Two ANC national ministers have been demoted to deputies and replaced by members of the DA in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s government of national unity (GNU) Cabinet. The DA walked away as the biggest winner among the opposition, securing six minister and six deputy minister positions, after receiving 20% of the vote in the election, the second highest behind the ANC. Party leader John Steenhuisen has been appointed Minister of Agriculture, former party chief whip Siviwe Gwarube is the Basic Education Minister and the new Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure is Dean Macpherson. The Minister of Home Affairs is Dr Leon Schreiber, Dr Dion George takes over as the Minister of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment and new Communications and Digital Technologies Minister is Solly Malatsi. But this inclusive approach came at a cost to two ANC ministers who led some of the government's most crucial departments. READ | FIRST TAKE: Making the GNU work: Is this Ramaphosa’s time? One example is Sihle Zikalala, former Public Works and Infrastructure Minister who has been replaced by Macpherson. The new public works minister served as DA shadow minister (spokesperson) for Trade and Industry in the fifth Parliament. Macpherson, from KwaZulu-Natal, served as ward councillor for Durban North in the eThekwini Municipality between 2009 and 2014. He also served as the Chief Whip of the party until 2013. Zikalala served as the minister of Public Works and Infrastructure from 2023 replacing Patricia de Lille who was moved to the Tourism Ministry. Before his redeployment to the national government, Zikalala had been the MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal and a member of the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature. He served as the eighth Premier of KwaZulu-Natal from 2019 until his resignation in 2022 and as the provincial chairperson of the ANC from 2015 to 2022. He has held various leadership positions in the ANC. ???? The DA is proud to rise to the challenge & take our place, for the first time, at the seat of national government where we can introduce our track record of good governance, zero tolerance for corruption & pragmatic policy-making. pic.twitter.com/Na5YHLMZOk — Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) June 30, 2024 Another national minister who was demoted to make way for a member of the DA is Mondli Gungubele. He is now the deputy minister of communications after serving as the Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies. Previously, he also served as Minister in the Presidency (2021–2023) and Deputy Minister of Finance (2018–2019). Gungebele was also the executive mayor of the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality from 2010 to 2016. He was among key ANC leaders who pushed for Ramaphosa's ascent to the party presidency in 2017 and 2022. He has also been chairperson of the Social Development Committee in Parliament from 2019 to 2021. Now, Gungubele will once again be a deputy minister, but his boss will be from the DA, its national spokesperson, Solly Malatsi. Malatsi first became an MP in April 2014. More recently, he has been serving as the party's national spokesperson and one of the party's deputy federal chairpersons. Malatsi has a Bachelor of Administration degree, majoring in Public Administration and Development Studies from the University of Limpopo. He was part of the inaugural class of the DA Young Leaders programme in 2007. READ | Overhauled and shaken up: Is Ramaphosa's new economic cluster primed for growth? He joined the party's parliamentary team as a researcher in 2008 after completing his Honours Degree in Political Studies at Wits University. He has extensive experience in political and government communications, having served as spokesperson for the former Western Cape MEC of Transport and Public Works, Robin Carlisle (June 2009 to May 2011) and former executive mayor of Cape Town, Patricia de Lille (June 2011 to March 2014). The DA also walked away with deputy minister positions. These include: Deputy Minister of Finance Ashor Sarupen. Deputy Minister of Energy and Electricity Samantha Graham-Maré. Deputy Minister of Small Business Development Jane Sithole. Deputy Minister of Higher Education Dr Mimmy Gondwe. Deputy Minister of Trade, Industry and Competition Andrew Whitfield. Deputy Minister of Water and Sanitation Sello Seitlholo. UDM leader Bantu Holomisa has been appointed as Deputy Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, which is now led by Minister Angie Motshekga. Holomisa was one of the main leaders of a so-called progressive caucus seen as an alternative to the GNU, but days after the caucus was formed, the UDM joined the GNU and was rewarded with a position. The IFP also walked away with senior positions. Its party leader, Velinkosini Hlabisa, is the new Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, while the new Public Service and Administration Minister is the IFP's Mzamo Buthelezi. IFP national spokesperson Mkhuleko Hlengwa has been appointed as Deputy Minister of Transport under Barbara Creecy, who will lead the department. During the sixth Parliament, Hlengwa served as chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) – the finance watchdog of the national legislature. READ | New Basic Education Minister Siviwe Gwarube has her work cut out for her, say experts Narend Singh, the IFP's long-serving parliamentary chief whip, has been appointed as Deputy Minister of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment. Pan Africanist Congress president Mzwanele Nyhontso has been appointed Land Reform and Rural Development Minister. The PAC has a strong focus on land reform and with their president at the helm of this department, it is expected that the land issue and land reform will be pushed through at the highest level of government. Patriotic Alliance leader Gayton McKenzie has been appointed Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture. Since the GNU negotiations, McKenzie has been clear that he wants the Home Affairs Ministry. During the election campaign, McKenzie focused strongly on undocumented foreign nationals with his abahambe (the PA's call to deport undocumented foreigners) campaign. The other major surprise in the GNU was that of Freedom Front Plus leader Pieter Groenewald being appointed Minister of Correctional Services. The party initially indicated that it would join the GNU but preferred Parliamentary and not executive positions. Ganief Hendricks, leader of Al Jama-ah, has been appointed as Deputy Minister of Social Development. Al Jama-ah, which has been seen as a staunch supporter of the ANC, is a party that upholds Muslim interests in South Africa. It is in a coalition with the ANC in the City of Johannesburg, where it holds the mayoral seat. Leader of the GOOD Party, Patricia de Lille, returns to her position as Minister of Tourism.