President Cyril Ramaphosa has appointed his new Cabinet. Ramaphosa announced some new faces, while others have disappeared from his executive. The president stressed the importance of an inclusive government of national unity Cabinet. South Africans had to wait for nearly an hour on Sunday night for President Cyril Ramaphosa to finally name his new Cabinet. However, after two intense weeks of negotiation between parties in the government of national unity (GNU), the country finally has an executive. In his address, Ramaphosa said he was aware that some South Africans had been impatient about the time it was taking to announce a Cabinet, adding that they sometimes took a year to form in some countries. "It is true that some South Africans have expressed concern about the length of time it has taken to form a government. As the discussions have unfolded, they have been worried about the effect of a protracted process on confidence and stability," he said. "At the same time, many people have pointed to the experiences of other countries that have a far longer history of democracy, where the formation of multi-party governments have sometimes taken several months." "The establishment of the government of national unity in its current form is unprecedented in the history of our democracy," Ramaphosa added. He said the establishment of the GNU had to ensure that the outcome of the election was considered and that the capabilities of all parties represented were taken into account. "As a relatively young democracy, we should be proud that we have moved to establish a government comprised of 11 parties within such a short space of time." Announcing his Cabinet, Ramaphosa said he has had to ensure that he considered gender, youth, demographics, and regional distribution. "We want South Africans to see themselves reflected not only in the composition of government, but also in its policies and programmes," he said. The president added that while he had wanted to reduce the size of his Cabinet, it had not been possible because of the "need to ensure that the national executive is inclusive of all parties to the government of national unity". ROLLING COVERAGE | Ramaphosa's Cabinet grows as DA, IFP and other GNU parties get ministries Ramaphosa said this had led to the separation of other portfolios "to ensure that there is sufficient focus on key issues". The new ministries which have emerged are: Ministry of Electricity and Energy; Ministry of Mineral and Petroleum Resources; Ministry of Agriculture has been separated from Land Reform and Rural Development; Ministry of Higher Education which has been separated from Science, Technology and Innovation; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Development has been separated from Correctional Services. Ramaphosa also announced that there will no longer be a ministry of public enterprises, and that its functions would now fall under the Presidency. There are several new names in the Cabinet, mainly from the DA, but also including the PA, PAC, UDM, IFP, FF Plus, and GOOD. Some people who served as ministers in the sixth administration are now deputies in the GNU, and serving under DA ministers. Some notable names that Ramaphosa has included are: DA leader John Steenhuisen will be minister of agriculture; UDM president Bantu Holomisa is deputy minister of defence and military veterans; IFP president Velenkosini Hlabisa will be minister of cooperative governance and traditional affairs; PAC president Mzwanele Nyhontsho is minister of land and rural development; PA president Gayton McKenzie is minister of sports, arts, and culture; Al Jama-ah president Ganief Hendricks will be deputy minister of social development; FF Plus president Pieter Groenewald is minister of correctional services. GOOD president Patricia De Lille has retained her position as tourism minister. Ramaphosa said no one had been appointed to serve the interests of a particular constituency, political party, or section of society. "Collectively and individually, they are responsible to the people of South Africa," he added.