Bishop Dulton Adams and Thulani Kunene have been appointed chair and deputy chair of committees in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. The sitting took place at Selbourne Hall in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature in Johannesburg. It was convened by Speaker of the House, Morakane Mosupyoe, on Tuesday morning. ACDP Gauteng leader, Bishop Dulton Adams was elected as chairman of committees in the Gauteng legislature on Tuesday, with the ANC's Thulani Kunene as his deputy. Both leaders were elected unopposed during a special first sitting of the seventh administration convened by House Speaker Morakane Mosupyoe on Tuesday morning. Adams was nominated by ANC MPL, Matshidiso Mfikoe, while Kunene was nominated by ANC MPL, Mzi Khumalo. Adams and Kunene accepted and were duly announced as leaders by Mosupyoe. Speaking shortly after his election, Adams committed to serving the people of Gauteng and "doing everything in his powers to make sure that the oversight on committees will be done without fear or favour". Using the experience over the last five years at the legislature, Adams promised to assist the Speaker, her deputy, and all the committee chairs "to make sure that the centre holds" in Gauteng. He said: I want to assure you that the deployment and the mandate given to me today will not be taken lightly. Let us do what is right for the people and make sure that in every committee, the decisions that we take must be for the betterment of the people of Gauteng. Adams urged his colleagues to take their oversight responsibilities seriously. "Whatever our decisions or resolutions are, we must not be afraid to apply what must be applied and make sure that the executive is held accountable," he added. The first sitting was certainly eventful, as the EFF's dress code was challenged. ANC MPL Adv Ezra Letsoalo raised a point of order asking the Speaker to make a ruling on the decorum of the House after one of the EFF members wore a mining safety hat during the sitting. "In the previous legislative term there was a ruling in so far as attire is concerned. I thought that maybe our fellow member from the EFF wearing a hat in the sitting might be problematic because it might condone other people to conform to that practice. I would like the Speaker to correct it in the most subtle tone so that it is not seen as a prevalent practice," said Letsoalo. READ | STATE OF PLAY: Natasha Marrian - The politics of self-interest loom large in Gauteng As soon as Letsoalo took his seat, the EFF benches chanted: "It is not going to happen!" Mosupyoe reminded EFF members that there was a court ruling which prohibited the wearing of hats in the House. "There was a court ruling on the matter of decorum of the House and I think it was the first time that the matter was challenged in court when the EFF first joined the National Assembly. It was agreed that, yes, members are allowed to wear their overalls, but hats are not allowed," she ruled. EFF members tried to raise points of order to challenge the ruling, but the Speaker shut it down and moved onto the next item on the agenda. READ | Stalemate in Gauteng as DA refuses 'to be taken hostage in a government of provincial unity' In a statement released on Tuesday afternoon, Mosupyoe confirmed that her deputy, DA's Refiloe Nt'sekhe, had resigned with immediate effect. Mosupyoe said Nt'sekhe would remain a MPL. The resignation comes after the DA and the ANC could not reach a consensus in forming a government in the province. The stalemate led to Gauteng premier Panyaza Lesufi announcing an executive that excluded the DA last week. Thanking Nt'sekhe, the Speaker said: "I extend my gratitude to Hon Refiloe Nt'sekhe for her service and leadership. Her decision to step down is regrettable, but I am confident that we will find a suitable candidate to fulfill this crucial role in our legislature." She said a special sitting would be scheduled to elect a new deputy speaker. "I call upon all members to approach the upcoming proceedings with a spirit of cooperation and commitment to the best interests of the people of Gauteng. Together, let us uphold the principles of democracy and work tirelessly to address the challenges facing our province," she added.