The US Ambassador to SA, Reuben Brigety, condemned the assassination attempt on Donald Trump. He said President Joe Biden had called on American citizens "to turn down the temperature politically". The ambassador sat down with News24 to discuss a wide range of issues on Tuesday. The US Ambassador to South Africa, Reuben Brigety, condemned the assassination attempt on former US president Donald Trump, reiterating President Joe Biden's call to "turn down the temperature" during the election season. In an exclusive interview with News24 on Tuesday, Brigety said the loss of lives after a 20-year-old nursing home aide, Thomas Matthew Crooks, shot at Trump during an election rally in Pennsylvania on Saturday was regrettable. US law enforcement agencies shot and killed Crooks during the incident, which sent shockwaves globally. At least three rally attendees were shot, and one of whom was killed. Brigety said: "Both as the personal representative of the president of the United States here in South Africa and as an American citizen, the attack and the assassination attempt on former president Donald Trump was horrific. "We condemn it categorically, and we mourn for those who were killed and injured in that assault. President Biden gave an address to the nation from the Oval Office on Sunday, in which he said that this kind of violence has no place in America or any violence, period. And, of course, he is right. "He has called for all of us to turn down the temperature politically, even as we are engaged in an election season." READ | DEVELOPING: Hero's welcome for bandaged Trump at Republican convention On Tuesday, Reuters reported that Biden on Sunday used the formal setting of the White House Oval Office to ask Americans to lower the political temperature and recommit themselves to resolving their differences peacefully. Biden reportedly said the 5 November presidential election would be a "time of testing". In an interview with NBC News on Monday, Biden said it was a mistake for him to use the term "bullseye" in reference to Trump during a recent donor campaign call. The American president postponed a trip to Texas on Monday, where he was expected to speak on the 60th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act at the Lyndon B Johnson presidential library. According to the report, White House officials hoped the Trump assassination attempt might ease pressure on Biden to step aside as his Democratic Party's candidate in response to concerns about his mental acuity and stamina to govern for another four-year term. Asked whether he thought the incident would bolster Trump's election campaign, Brigety said: "As a sitting ambassador, I do not engage in partisan political discussions. I do not know what the American people are going to say. "I know that the American people are going to have their say, and I know, as in our democracy and every other democracy, when there are free and fair elections, the people are right, by definition. So, we will see."