Ronald Lamola is adamant South Africa will maintain its non-aligned stance on global issues. This amid a review of the US' relations with South Africa. US lawmakers want the review, given South Africa's stance on Israel as well as its close ties with Russia, China and Iran. There is no basis for punishing South Africa for its stance on human rights atrocities across the world. That was the message new International Relations and Cooperation Minister Ronald Lamola had for the US after the US House voted to pass legislation requiring a "full review" of Washington's bilateral ties with Pretoria. The vote took place in May on the same day South Africans went to the polls to elect a new government - and it came amid strained relations due to South Africa's stance on Israel as well as its ties with Russia, China and Iran. But, according to Lamola, South Africa was simply fighting for the oppressed by using international institutions across the globe. "These institutions have been created by themselves and other multilateral institutions that we are using to advocate for the rights of the people of Gaza. As a sovereign country, we must be able to take independent decisions that advocate for human rights, but also for our own national interest," he said. On Thursday, Lamola spoke at a symposium, which was hosted by the South African Institute of International Affairs, ahead of his department's budget vote in Parliament. READ | Nyet! Presidency, Dirco silent on who footed bill for Zuma's Zim, Russia escapades The legislation in the US, which passed the lower chamber of Congress by a vote of 272 to 144 as an amendment to another bill, is not yet law. It still needs to pass the Senate and be signed into law by the White House. The legislation obliges the US president to "fully" review the US's bilateral relationship with South Africa and publicly release a report on whether the country has engaged in activities that "undermine US national security or foreign policy interests". It also requires a third report on the extent of South Africa's defence cooperation with Iran, China and Russia. Experts believe a review of the bilateral relationship could endanger South Africa regarding the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). We will continue to engage the world as equals. South Africa's non-alignment and universality posture willremain sacrosanct. pic.twitter.com/qI3F3GMo3g — Minister: International Relations and Cooperation (@RonaldLamola) July 11, 2024 AGOA is a trade pact that grants South Africa and 30 other African countries duty-free access to the US for thousands of goods. South Africa is the largest US trade partner in Africa and the largest beneficiary of AGOA. In 2022, it exported goods worth around R65 billion to the world's biggest consumer market. Lamola said AGOA was a mutually beneficial treaty, adding: It is not only South Africa, but also the US and various US companies that are benefitting from it. We are benefitting in the entirety of the African continent. "So, this is a message we continue to take to the various stakeholders in the US, including Congress and the various players … it's a mutually beneficial treaty that must continue and we will continue with that engagement," he added. Lamola said the government of national unity was clear on the country's foreign policy - and it would continue on a human rights base trajectory. "Our stance with regards to human rights in any part of the world should not be mixed with the economic and beneficial engagements that we always have with the north and south, which we believe remain important for the economic benefit of our country, for foreign direct investment, and so forth," he added.