Julius Malema has responded to the latest VBS scandal allegations. He claims the allegations against the EFF are a rehash of old stories. The EFF leader made it clear the party would not be deterred by the VBS matter. EFF leader Julius Malema says he is not running away from answering questions on the VBS bank scandal - he's just tired of answering nonsense. On Thursday, Malema and his progressive caucus partners in Parliament briefed journalists ahead of President Cyril Ramaphosa's Opening of Parliament Address. The progressive caucus gave a detailed briefing on their work in Parliament, but the VBS scandal overshadowed the briefing. "I'm not scared about this VBS. There's no affidavit... it is a sponsored propaganda that is aimed at intimidating the EFF. I will never be defocused by VBS. Those questions were raised at that time and facts were never found. No leader of the EFF received VBS money," said Malema. An explosive affidavit, deposed by convicted fraudster Tshifhiwa Matodzi, confirmed major aspects of advocate Terry Motau's investigation report into the collapse of the VBS Mutual Bank in March 2018. READ | Phala Phala: DA unlikely to support no confidence motion in Ramaphosa - Steenhuisen In addition to confirming Motau's findings on how the bank was looted, Matodzi added more evidence not previously disclosed against some prominent persons and entities. Matodzi, who is VBS' former chairperson, was convicted and sentenced to an effective 15 years in jail for his crimes, which helped collapse the Limpopo-based bank, with more than R2 billion stolen by its executives and shareholders in an elaborate fraud. In his 'The Great Bank Heist' report into the collapse of the bank, Motau found 53 "persons of interest" illegally received about R1.89 billion from the bank between March 2015 and June 2018. [MUST WATCH]: President @Julius_S_Malema responding to issues of Phala-Phala, VBS and the political parties who were members of the Progressive Caucus but abandoned it for GNU brigade. pic.twitter.com/gMTTOg8MKy — Economic Freedom Fighters (@EFFSouthAfrica) July 18, 2024 Malema said VBS money was never given to the EFF. "It [EFF] received the money to an extent that Sgameka was called by the curators of VBS and reached an agreement with the curators of VBS to pay back the loan they took from VBS. That loan has since been paid. Try something else," he said. Malema added: The only thing that is going to silence me from raising matters in this country is death. Outside death, nothing will stop me. Nothing will intimidate me. I'm not scared of Ramaphosa and all of those in cahoots. Let them bring it on. We are ready to fight them. Malema said no one had asked who the biggest ANC benefactors of the VBS scandal were. National Coloured Congress leader Fadiel Adams, who is also part of the caucus, defended Malema. "You know, no one ever asked the DA how much you could benefit from Steinhoff here in the City of Cape Town. Eight people are before the court for R243 million in the City of Cape Town. It's as if people of colour, or people who demand equality, are being persecuted by the very same media that is supposed to be everybody's watchdog," Adams said. The MK Party's parliamentary leader, John Hlophe, who is now the official leader of the opposition, also defended Malema. "You should stop abusing us like this, when we give you [journalists] an opportunity to ask questions about a particular matter," he said.