EFF secretary-general Marshall Dlamini is not sorry for slapping a police officer in Parliament. Dlamini said he would do it again given the same circumstances because he believed party leader Julius Malema was going to be assassinated. Dlamini was sentenced to 18 months wholly suspended, plus a R6 000 fine, after being found guilty of assault and malicious damage to property. After being sentenced for assaulting a police officer in Parliament and maliciously damaging his glasses, EFF secretary-general Marshall Dlamini says he will do it again given the same set of circumstances. "What I did that day, I can do it again," he said to applause outside the Cape Town Regional Court on Friday. Magistrate Nasha Banwari sentenced Dlamini to 18 months wholly suspended for five years for assault with grievous bodily harm for hitting Warrant Officer Johan Carstens in the face in the lobby of the National Assembly building after the State of the Nation Address in February 2019. He will not go to prison unless he is again convicted of assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm within the suspension period. Anwari sentenced Dlamini to three months in prison or a fine of R6 000 for malicious damage to Carstens' glasses, which Dlamini broke on the bridge of his nose, leaving a cut. Member of Parliament It is not immediately clear if the suspension of the 18-month sentence means Dlamini is at risk of losing his seat in Parliament. The Constitution states anyone convicted of an offence and sentenced to more than 12 months' imprisonment without the option of a fine could be disqualified for five years until after the sentence has been completed. It does not specifically state a position regarding a suspended sentence, which presiding officers often apply to first time offenders. But the Constitution adds "no one may be regarded as having been sentenced until an appeal against the conviction or sentence has been determined, or until the time for an appeal has expired". Comment from the spokesperson for Parliament was not immediately available to clarify this, but the EFF has already stated it will appeal the "vindictive" conviction and sentence, so this holds any potential risk to his seat at bay if Parliament does count a suspended sentence of 18 months as a reason to disqualify an MP. Lack of remorse In her pre-sentencing remarks, Anwari said there was no place for Dlamini's conduct in a society already living with high levels of violence. "Your actions towards the complainant was totally unwarranted in the circumstances. You maintained throughout this trial you did not know he [Carstens] is a policeman. He was on duty performing his functions. "An attack on a member of the SA Police Service unprovoked, is unacceptable. That is not what a responsible person would do in the circumstances," she added. "Communities expect a high level of responsibility by its leaders. When a leader resorts to violence, the interest of society are undermined." EFF supporters gathered to receive their secretary-general after he got a suspended sentence for assaulting a police officer. (Jenni Evans/News24) Anwari said she was concerned by his lack of remorse. "In this instance, what one really expected sir, after seeing footage, you should at least have conceded that you misconstrued things. But you did not do that sir, so I can't find that there is any remorse." She added Carstens was psychologically affected by what happened, and embarrassed. The video of the assault kept circulating, and he had to keep it from his elderly parents. Some of his colleagues goaded him for not standing up for himself because he did not retaliate. However, Anwari said Dlamini was a first offender, who seemed to have learned his lesson. READ | Court rejects EFF bigwig's 'assassination plot' defence after assault on cop He was doing important work for society in Parliament, and she did not think society would be served by sending him to prison. "Nor do I think it would be a suitable punishment for you. I am prepared to accept that; indeed, a lesson had been learned." The court was filled with EFF leadership from all nine provinces, and other MPs, who shouted "Fokof DA", and "Down with the government of national unity [GNU]", during pre-speech chants, as the protracted negotiations to form a government continue. Dlamini, who was represented by top advocates Laurance Hodes SC and Ross McKernan, repeated to his supporters the rejected explanation he was protecting EFF leader Julius Malema from assassination. Using the plural "we" when telling supporters what he was sentenced to, he claimed the police tipped him off somebody embedded in Parliament's security would create a commotion, and then kill Malema. ALSO READ | EFF's Marshall Dlamini gets suspended sentence for assault in Parliament Dlamini said in the melee of people leaving the National Assembly Building, he saw Carstens heading for Malema, and reacted, without asking questions. This was also contained in a statement released by the EFF the day after the assault, where they claimed the potential assassin would be a right-winger. During the trial, the court heard the MPs and guests were in a holding pattern in the lobby waiting for photographers to finish taking pictures of President Cyril Ramaphosa and guests. The EFF allegedly tried to push through to leave the lobby, and when Carstens and another officer tried to get them to pause, Dlamini reacted. "And I knew that once the life of the president is [under] threat, it's the life of the organisation, we have to respond. And we were not going to respond with flowers," he told supporters, while two Kombi loads of Public Order Police not kitted up in their protective gear, monitored them from a distance. READ MORE | SONA cop assault case: Expert says Dlamini has low risk of reoffending Calling Carstens, a "white racist boy", Dlamini said he would not apologise or show remorse for what he did. Anwari added although the incident upset Carstens, he said he had forgiven Dlamini. Dlamini thanked supporters for standing by him for the five years of the trial. "We have defeated. This is a victory for us." He left with a quip the party could resolve the protracted GNU talks. "Then South Africans can continue with their lives."