Ministers and deputy ministers of the seventh democratic administration have been sworn in. The new Cabinet ministers declared they are ready to work and address the country's pressing challenges. The Cabinet is made up of members from parties that are part of the GNU. South Africa's seventh democratic government has been sworn in, with several new Cabinet ministers declaring their readiness to hit the ground running. On Wednesday, Chief Justice Raymond Zondo presided over the swearing-in of ministers and deputy ministers at a ceremony in Cape Town. President Cyril Ramaphosa announced the names of the members of the seventh administration on Sunday evening. He appointed several members from different political parties when establishing the government of national unity as no party received an outright majority in the 29 May polls. Newly appointed Water and Sanitation Minister Pemmy Majodina said there was little to be excited about. "Water is a challenge not only in South Africa, but globally. The effects of global warming and climate change are some of the matters that affect us and therefore, we must work together with municipalities to ensure that water provision does not get compromised," she added. READ | South Africans happier after Cabinet announcement, index finds Re-appointed Tourism Minister Patricia de Lille said she was ready to serve the country again. "I think the president sometimes thinks I must sweep. I will continue to clean up South African Tourism, the entity of the Department of Tourism. "So far in the first year, I've been able to save the country R1 billion by stopping the Tottenham Hotspurs deal. "Just in April, I recovered another R35 million from our New York office where suppliers were paid, and they did nothing. So, we are cleaning up with the help of the Special Investigating Unit," she added. Asked about her working relationship with the DA, De Lille said she would rise above petty politics. She said: That is our task and where we need to get together, we need to respect each other. "But then I will also continue my cleaning up. You know, I think the president sometimes think I'm a broom; I must sweep." Deputy Electricity and Energy Minister Samantha Graham said the country wanted to see all political parties working together. "I think they're tired of the opposition wailing and you know, the governing party lying. So, I think we can work to make the change." Deputy Defence Minister Bantu Holomisa added he was ready to take on all challenges. "I was a member of the Portfolio of Defence as well as the former deputy chairperson of the National Defence for Service Commission. So, I'm familiar with the environment and I'm thankful to the president for having me."