US ambassador to South Africa, Reuben Brigety says relations remain strong despite differing views between Pretoria and Washington. The ambassador says South Africa and the US have agreed not to talk about the Lady R saga in public. Brigety sat down with News24 to discuss a wide range of issues on Tuesday. Like in any marriage, couples argue. This is a sign of a healthy relationship. This is how the US ambassador to South Africa, Reuben Brigety, described the sometimes turbulent relationship between Pretoria and its second-largest trade partner, Washington. Brigety says: "When I was a young man, before I got married or even met the woman who became my wife, one of my older friends who was already married said to me: 'You know, you have to be suspicious of any marriage where people are not arguing because it means that the people are not being honest.' "And so, the fact that they [South Africa and the US] are frankly arguing means they are committed to the relationship. It is when people go silent that you need to be worried. And so while it is true that we have been fortunate to receive multiple ministerial delegations from South Africa to Washington, the reverse is also true." In an exclusive interview with News24 on Tuesday, Brigety's loud voice echoed in the passages of the US Embassy on 887 Pretorius Street in Pretoria before he entered the brightly lit boardroom for the interview. With a large coffee mug in one hand and a baseball ball in the other, Brigety walked in and offered a firm diplomatic handshake before sitting down. Clad in a navy blue suit paired with his signature bowtie, he explained that he used the baseball ball as a stress reliever. "Baseball is America's pastime. I grew up deathly afraid of playing baseball. If you imagine that thing coming at you at 120 miles an hour. But I am an American ambassador, so there is a South African baseball league, who knew? I keep this in my office, and so, whenever I have meetings, I kind of use it as a fidget," said the animated ambassador. The interview takes place after 20-year-old nursing home aide Thomas Matthew Crooks shot at former US president Donald Trump during an election rally in Pennsylvania on Saturday. US law enforcement agencies shot and killed Crooks during the incident. READ | US ambassador to SA condemns 'horrific' assassination attempt on Trump The meeting also comes weeks after US President Joe Biden called President Cyril Ramaphosa to congratulate him on forming a government of national unity (GNU) after the 29 May polls. He said: "One of the things that we usually say is that the real test of democracy isn't whether or not you have a free and fair election or peaceful transfer of power, even though both are really important. The real test of democracy is when you have those things with the peaceful transfer from one political formation to another. "So, with deep respect, it's not for the United States or anybody else in the world to expect anything from the GNU. We will always deal with whatever the government of the day is in South Africa." Brigety said he looked forward to working with the newly appointed International Relations and Cooperation Minister Ronald Lamola. "Secretary of State Anthony Blinken has called minister Lamola, and they had a very good conversation in which they committed to continue working together to strengthen the bilateral relationship and to advance our mutual interests, and I look forward to engaging minister Lamola in his new capacity at his convenience." Brigety was very diplomatic when asked how he'd describe the relations between the US and South Africa. The question comes after a rocky two years where South Africa took a non-aligned stance in the Russia-Ukraine conflict and took Israel to the International Court of Justice for acts of genocide in the Gaza Strip. He said: I think it's been clear that we don't agree on everything, but I have learned this beautiful South African phrase, since I have been here, that we do not have in the United States, this beautiful idea that we are working to find each other. "And, I think it is objectively true that in the past two years since I have been here, we have seen a level of engagement at both high and ongoing levels between our governments. The likes which we haven't seen for at least a decade and a half. "I would argue that the data shows the relationship between the US and South Africa remains strong and strategic, and it is recognised as such by both sides and we continue to work to make sure that that is the case." Last week, Lamola lashed out at the US saying there was no basis for punishing South Africa for its stance on human rights atrocities across the world. READ | US bilateral review: SA's human rights stance, economic engagements 'should not be mixed' - Lamola According to a News24 report, Lamola had directed the message to the US after the US House voted to pass legislation requiring a "full review" of Washington's bilateral ties with Pretoria. The vote took place in May on the same day South Africans went to the polls to elect a new government - and it came amid strained relations due to South Africa's stance on Israel as well as its ties with Russia, China and Iran. The legislation in the US, which passed the lower chamber of Congress by a vote of 272 to 144 as an amendment to another bill, is not yet law. It still needs to pass the Senate and be signed into law by the White House. The legislation obliges the US president to "fully" review the US' bilateral relationship with South Africa and publicly release a report on whether the country has engaged in activities that "undermine US national security or foreign policy interests". It also requires a third report on the extent of South Africa's defence cooperation with Iran, China and Russia. Experts believe a review of the bilateral relationship could endanger South Africa regarding the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) - a trade pact that grants South Africa and 30 other African countries duty-free access to the US for thousands of goods. South Africa is the largest US trade partner in Africa and the largest beneficiary of AGOA. In 2022, it exported goods worth around R65 billion to the world's biggest consumer market. READ | Business lobby alarmed as US House votes for 'full review' of SA relationship Explaining the process expected to unfold before Biden signs the legislation into law, Brigety said: "In the executive branch, president Biden has made clear that we will continue to work positively and constructively with our South African partners to advance the strategic relationship. "For any bill to become law in the US, broadly speaking, it has to be passed in identical form by a majority of the house and the Senate, and it has to be sent to the president for his signature, and he must sign it within a certain period of time for it to become law. "In this particular case, with regard to the draft legislation regarding the review of US bilateral relations with South Africa, that is legislation that originated in the US House, it has passed as part of a broader piece of legislation with the majority in the House of Representatives. That piece of legislation, the National Defence Authorisation Act, with the attachment of this particular review act, will then be sent to the US Senate. I don't know if the US Senate is going to pass it with an identical form, which would be required for it to be sent to the president for a signature. "Even if the Senate did pass it in identical form, I don't know if the president of the United States will sign it. So, from a legislative process, this is still multiple steps away from becoming law, and any one of those steps can prevent it from becoming law. Our Congress sits for two-year terms (after federal elections), so any legislation that is not passed by the end of that Congress goes away. "In order for it to become law later, it has to be reintroduced in another Congress and then go through the exact same process. So, this Congress will be concluded in January 2025." During an exclusive interview with News24 on Tuesday, US ambassador to SA, Reuben Brigety, admitted that he uses a baseball ball as a stress reliever. (Thahasello Mphatsoe/News24) Having said that, Brigety added: "The fact that this legislation was both introduced and is passed by a majority of votes on a bipartisan basis, in the House of Representatives, suggests that there is a majority of members in the lower house that have concerns about issues that have developed in this relationship ... We will see if anything happens with this legislation." Asked whether the US was not concerned that if it severed bilateral ties with South Africa, China and Russia could step in, Brigety said: "This legislation, at this point, is just that. It is not law. Quite frankly, there are literally thousands of bills on all manner of things, both in foreign and domestic affairs, that are introduced every year but never become law." In a bid to quell tensions between Pretoria and Washington, Ramaphosa has been sending special envoys to explain South Africa's non-aligned stance on the Russia-Ukraine conflict. In a phone call to Ramaphosa earlier this month, Biden committed to working closely with the newly formed seventh administration on key areas such as economic growth, job creation, social development and climate change. Biden also confirmed that he would visit South Africa and participate in the G20 meetings in 2025. READ | Biden commends Ramaphosa on GNU, commits to work closely with seventh administration Does this mean the ongoing conversations have persuaded Washington? Brigety believes so. "These are ongoing [engagements] ... That is a good thing and it demonstrates that we recognise that this is a relationship requires tending and, on both sides, we are doing the work," said the ambassador. Brigety said he had also engaged new Trade, Industry and Competition Minister Parks Tau about AGOA and the nature of the two countries' trade relations. In November 2023, Ramaphosa used the AGOA Forum held in Johannesburg to call for a decade-long extension of the legislation. Asked whether the US was considering the request, Brigety said: "It has to be passed in identical form by both houses of Congress and signed by the president with the added stipulation. In this case, the legislation which authorises AGOA will expire on 1 October 2025. So, it has to be renewed, at the latest, by 30 September 2025. "Whether or not it will just essentially be extended as is, whether or not it will be just extended with the kinds of modification that President Ramaphosa and others have articulated and suggested, I don't know. It will be entirely up to what Congress negotiates and what they send to the president for his signature." READ | Pretoria to lead 'cordial' charm offensive in Washington amid vote to review bilateral ties This week, Tau will use the upcoming AGOA Summit in Washington to engage US lawmakers in reviewing bilateral ties with South Africa. Asked what the US will be pushing for when G20 leaders meet next year, Brigety said that while he could not speak to the commitment of the next US president, the world will be keenly looking at what will come out of the meetings. "We are eager to be in dialogue with our South African partners and our G20 partners to ensure that the G20 in the year 2025 is a success." Asked whether he regrets the upheaval caused when he accused South Africa of arming Russia when the Lady R cargo ship docked in Simons Town in December 2022, Brigety curtly said: "Our governments have agreed not to discuss this matter publicly."