President Cyril Ramaphosa said it was not possible to reduce the size of the Cabinet as government of national unity partners had to be accommodated. He announced a Cabinet comprising 32 ministers, and appointed 43 deputy ministers. Some portfolios were separated and others were merged. President Cyril Ramaphosa unveiled a bloated and dramatically reconfigured government of national unity (GNU) Cabinet on Sunday night, saying that he was unable to uphold his promise to significantly downsize the number of portfolios. "In the course of the sixth democratic administration, we indicated our intention to reduce the number of portfolios in the national executive. However, due to the need to ensure that the national executive is inclusive of all the parties to the government of national unity, this has not been possible." The president, who was re-elected on 14 June and inaugurated on 19 June, made his opening remarks at 21:53 - almost an hour later than scheduled. He appeared exhausted. News24 Ramaphosa had to pick ministers from 11 political parties which had entered into the GNU with the ANC after the party's abysmal performance during the May polls. It dipped to just over 40% of the vote, losing its outright majority for the first time since the dawn of democracy. News24 understands that the road to Sunday's announcement was rocky due to uncertainty and a tug-of-war over Cabinet positions. But Ramaphosa's crucial meeting last Friday with DA leader John Steenhuisen sealed the deal. The nine other parties participating in the GNU are the IFP, FF Plus, Patriotic Alliance, GOOD, PAC, Al Jama-ah, UDM, Rise Mzansi and the United Africans Transformation. In 1994, former President Nelson Mandela's GNU Cabinet consisted of 27 ministers. There were 13 deputies. Between 1999 and 2004, when Thabo Mbeki took over, the number of ministers rose to 28. During his second term, it decreased to 26. During former president Kgalema Motlanthe's short stint, from September 2008 to May 2009, the Cabinet had 28 ministers. Former president Jacob Zuma increased the Cabinet to 34 when he took office, and the number rose to 35 during his second term. READ | FIRST TAKE: Making the GNU work: Is this Ramaphosa’s time? When Ramaphosa took over from 2018 to 2019, he inherited 33 Cabinet ministers from Zuma and eventually appointed his own Cabinet of 30 ministers in 2019. On Sunday night, Ramaphosa announced a Cabinet of 32 ministers. He also appointed 43 deputy ministers. (Sharlene Rood/News24) (Sharlene Rood/News24) (Sharlene Rood/News24) (Sharlene Rood/News24) (Sharlene Rood/News24) (Sharlene Rood/News24) According to the Constitution, the Cabinet consists of the president as its head, a deputy president, and ministers. The president appoints the deputy president and ministers, assigns their powers and functions, and may dismiss them. Deputy ministers do not form part of the Cabinet, but are appointed to assist the Cabinet. While the ANC received the lion's share of the positions, the DA took six ministries and six deputy minister positions. READ | Two ANC ministers demoted as DA secure six ministers, six deputy ministers in new-look Cabinet Announcing the changes, the president said the electricity and energy portfolios were merged, mining was separated from energy into minerals and petroleum resources, and agriculture was split from the land reform, and rural development. The Ministry of Higher Education has been separated from the Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Development has been separated from the Ministry of Correctional Services. The Ministry of Public Enterprises has ceased to exist, and all relevant coordination will be carried out from within his office with the implementation of a new shareholder model. Paul Mashatile returns in his role as the deputy president, which is also the leader of government business. Steenhuisen has been appointed Minister of Agriculture, taking over from National Assembly Speaker Thoko Didiza. These were the ministries allocated to parties that form part of the GNU: DA Basic Education - Siviwe Gwarube Communications and Digital Technologies - Solly Malatsi Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment - Dion George Home Affairs - Leon Schreiber Public Works and Infrastructure - Dean Macpherson IFP Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs - Velinkosini Hlabisa Public Service and Administration - Mzamo Buthelezi PAC Land Reform and Rural Development - Mzwanele Nyhontso GOOD Tourism - Patricia De Lille FF Plus Correctional Services - Pieter Groenewald Patriotic Alliance Sport, Arts, and Culture - Gayton McKenzie Ramaphosa appointed Parks Tau to the contentious Department of Trade and Industry. He takes over from Ebrahim Patel, who decided to leave after the elections. Tau, who reportedly took Ramaphosa's seat in Parliament as an MP, used to be the Deputy Minister of Cooperative Governance. Another strategic appointment was that of IFP president Velenkosini Hlabisa to the Ministry of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Ramaphosa replaced Bheki Cele in the police portfolio with someone who hails from the same province. Senzo Mchunu was a premier in KwaZulu-Natal before taking up the role of Minister of Water and Sanitation in the 6th administration. The DA's Siviwe Gwarube takes up the basic education portfolio. However, only time will tell whether she can win unions over, particularly the Cosatu-aligned SA Democratic Teachers' Union. READ | New Basic Education Minister Siviwe Gwarube has her work cut out for her, say experts Ronald Lamola takes over as Minister of International Relations and Cooperation. Lamola, who was the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, successfully led South Africa's charge against Israel at the International Court of Justice in the Hague and will now have the mammoth task of delivering the G20 Summit when it is held on South African soil in 2025. Although he initially raised his hand for the home affairs and police portfolios, the PA's Gayton McKenzie was appointed Minister of Sports Arts and Culture, replacing, Zizi Kodwa who is facing corruption charges. Ramaphosa appointed Thembi Nkadimeng as the new Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development. She previously worked at the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Andries Nel, who served in Zuma's administration, returned as the Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development. He served as the deputy Minister of Constitutional Development until 2013. The president appointed seasoned politician and FF Plus leader Dr Pieter Groenewald as the correctional services minister. Groenewald is the longest-serving member of Parliament's Portfolio Committee for Police. READ | COALITION NATION | EFF proposes coalition with ANC, without DA and FF Plus The president reminded the newly appointed ministers and deputy ministers that it was a time to serve all South Africans. "None of the members of the national executive has been appointed to serve the interests of a particular constituency, a particular party, or a particular section of society. "Collectively and individually, they are responsible to the people of South Africa. In the spirit of partnership and collaboration, the incoming government will work together with other formations to convene a national dialogue." According to political analyst Dr Ongama Mtimka, South Africa has been offered a new political environment and political-economic order that could move the country from apartness to collaboration for the greater good. "We are now in 2024, facing a multi-faceted crisis, both at a micro-individual level and business level where the economy is not growing, and what that has done is to force everyone to think actively about what kind of political, economic society can work better. We are being allowed to reset from the order of 1994 to the order of 2024." He added that decisions by the new Cabinet ministers were crucial. READ | ANC and DA finally 'reached a deal' on GNU formation. But there are still 'final touches' needed Commenting on the size of the Cabinet, Mtimka said the idea of a standard size for population ratio was non-existent. "Political institutions are created by their political circumstances and the agents that act in a specific history. I am not looking at whether the Cabinet will shrink because, while it is understandable, my sense is that concerns about the size of Cabinet are sometimes trivialising what politicians must do to accommodate each other so that they can govern in peace." Politicians "have been disappointing" in the appointment of the right people for the job, Mtimka said. READ | Foundations 'of eminent freedom fighters' urge South Africans to join national dialogue Professor Susan Boysen believes the upcoming Cabinet Lekgotla will determine whether the GNU will last or not. "It's going to be important for these individual political parties, at least for the next few years, to forget about personal interests and find that inspiration to build a new shared plan for government," said Booysen. She warned that it was a "make-or-break" moment that would test Ramaphosa's leadership and added: "Some people say he has nothing to lose, so he should go for it, but I think he has to go for it because he has a massive amount to lose because he is leading into a totally new space. "We remember during the Covid-19 period, he just [allowed] Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to run the show. He was really not in charge of his Cabinet and did not know what was happening in the department, and I think that luxury is gone for Cyril Ramaphosa."