Farmworker rights groups expressed concerns over the appointment of John Steenhuisen as the new agriculture minister. He takes over from Thoko Didiza. Agri SA said Steenhuisen's appointment came as a surprise, and he would have his hands full with his new position. While some lauded the appointment of DA leader John Steenhuisen as the new agriculture minister, farm worker rights groups expressed concerns about his experience. On Sunday, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced his new Cabinet, naming Steenhuisen as his chosen candidate to head up the agriculture department. The DA leader takes over from Thoko Didiza. Ramaphosa announced the department would be separated from the Department of Land Reform and Rural Development. The director of the Rural and Farmworkers Development Organisation, Billy Claasen, did not mince his words about the choice of Steenhuisen as minister. "Our farm workers are going to suffer under John Steenhuisen. We must not stand back. Let us mobilise our farm workers," Claasen said, adding he had hoped for someone more experienced. "While we welcome some of the appointments in this new Cabinet, we were quite shocked by the appointment of a matriculant as the new minister of agriculture. "We always maintained that farm workers are the poorest of the poor and destitute of the country and that the DA has no compassion for the plight of farm workers and farm dwellers." READ | 'Time for confrontation is over': Steenhuisen calls on GNU to work together to fix SA's problems According to Claasen, the DA did not have a good relationship with labour unions and civil society organisations serving farm workers. "We have fought for transformation in the agricultural sector for years, and we are of the view the appointment of John Steenhuisen as minister will set us back. "Thirty years into democracy, farm workers are still being treated like second-class citizens of this beloved country." Claasen said farmworkers were already exploited and, in many incidences, were evicted from their farm homes and dumped alongside highways without any respect. "The appointment of Steenhuisen will bring an increase in evictions of farm workers, and farmers will become more arrogant," he claimed. "We call on the president to address the issues of farm workers as a matter of urgency, and we request a meeting with the president and or his deputy to address the burning issues of farm workers." Women on Farms Project co-director Carmen Louw did not welcome Steenhuisen's appointment. She said it signified strong support towards a pro-industrialised agriculture, moving further away from agrarian transformation and meaningful rural development and land reform. "This appointment most likely means a ministry that is more favourable towards producers and less favourable towards farm workers, especially women farm workers," Louw said. She added she believed Steenhuisen's appointment would also likely favour more export-orientated agricultural production at the cost of food security and sovereignty for those working the land. Former Agri SA CEO Christo van der Rheede said the appointment came as a "surprise" and Steenhuisen would have his hands full with his new position. "We've had interesting discussions about agriculture. He knows very little, which is understandable, but he has a key interest," added Van der Rheede, who is now an adjunct professor at the University of the Free State. "Farmers do their own thing; they really just need a conducive environment in which to operate. We need the agriculture minister to advocate for that." Van der Rheede said Steenhuisen would need to work on opening up new markets for the agriculture sector, as it was through foreign exchange that "agriculture becomes profitable". This will include tackling barriers to trade, such as issues at ports. ALSO READ | Port woes and drought drive sentiment in SA's agricultural sector to 15-year low Van der Rheede added he hoped Steenhuisen would focus on improving funding mechanisms for black farmers and prioritising biosecurity. "He shouldn't shy away from tapping into the experience of the agriculture sector. "He understands the importance of food security. If there's one thing that can save South Africa, it's to ensure there is healthy, available and affordable food on the shelves and that our markets operate efficiently," he said. The president of the Black Farmers' Association of South Africa, Dr Lennox Mtshagi, also welcomed Steenhuisen's appointment. "We're happy to have another minister as long as he's going to change the current situation of corruption. If he's not going to be 'Mr Promises', he will be supported," said Mtshagi. "All we want is for our people to be assisted and food security to be a priority. Resources must go where they are needed."