The Sunday Times reported that ANC chairperson Gwede Mantashe said DA federal council chairperson Helen Zille was acting as a "parallel president", imperilling the GNU. Zille suspects that her general remarks about coalitions have been misunderstood. She says she adheres to the separation of party and state. DA federal council chairperson Helen Zille says the notion that she is acting as a "parallel president" is the silliest thing she has ever heard. On Sunday, the Sunday Times reported that ANC chairperson and Mineral and Petroleum Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe said in an interview with the publication that Zille was acting like a parallel president in that DA ministers must report to her, and that her behaviour is the biggest threat to the government of national unity (GNU). Zille was part of the DA's team that negotiated terms of the GNU with the ANC. She told News24 she would not imperil something that she worked to build, adding that she strictly adheres to the separation of party and state. "I manage the DA as a political party, not the DA in government," said Zille. According to the Sunday Times, Mantashe's staff clarified that he was referring to Zille's statements on social media and media interviews, in particular an interview with Newzroom Afrika in which Zille said the president did not control all ministries and that ministers had "relative autonomy" to run their departments. Zille suspects her remarks were misunderstood or only heard in part. She said that, during the Newzroom Afrika interview, she spoke about coalitions in general, comparing the South African Constitution - which was not written with coalitions in mind, even though our proportional representation electoral system tends to produce coalitions - with the German Grundgesetz (Constitution), which is geared to coalitions. In the German system, ministers have "relative autonomy". READ | All GNU parties' manifestos will be considered for Seventh Administration's plan of action Earlier this month, the day after members of the executive were sworn in, Minister in the Presidency Khumbudzo Ntshavheni briefed the media on the workings of Cabinet, stressing that Cabinet decisions were collective decisions. She also sought to draw a clear line between parties and the government. Ntshavheni said: "As we go into Cabinet, we are not carrying a party card. We are carrying a government cap." The president, as the head of the national executive, exercises the executive authority of the Republic, "together with" the other members of the Cabinet in term of Section 85(2) of the Constitution, said Ntshavheni. "The phrase 'as the head of the Cabinet' captures the idea of collective responsibility, but it also allows the Cabinet and the president to determine the way and procedures by which they work together, including leaving certain matters or kinds of matters to be dealt with by a single member of the Cabinet. "Therefore, if a matter is not a routine, departmentally specific matter or function, it must first be referred to the Cabinet, as must all matters that the Cabinet itself has decided should come to it. In general, if a matter is not routine, it must be referred to the Cabinet for its consideration by way of a Cabinet memorandum," she added. Ntshavheni emphasised that the president and ministers were duty-bound to take matters of policy and significant decisions - for instance those with financial implications beyond a department's approved budget, and any matter the Cabinet had decided should be referred - to Cabinet. Mantashe made his remarks to the Sunday Times on Thursday, before Ramaphosa delivered the Opening of Parliament Address, which set out government's programme for the term. During the debate on this address on Friday, the parties belonging to the GNU all expressed their support for this programme and called for unity. This included Mantashe, who said: "The real challenge facing us in this House is putting our heads together to find lasting solutions to massive problems facing our country."