Former ANC president Jacob Zuma is bringing ANC member Tony Yengeni back from political obscurity. Yengeni will represent Zuma at his disciplinary hearing on Wednesday. Zuma has been charged for founding the MK Party and endorsing it ahead of the May general elections while he is still an ANC member. Former ANC president Jacob Zuma has opted to be represented by controversial ANC member Tony Yengeni during his disciplinary hearing on Wednesday. Ahead of the general elections in May, the ANC announced that Zuma would be hauled before a disciplinary hearing after he announced that he would back and campaign for the ANC's newest political foe, uMkhonto weSizwe (MK) Party, which went on to maul considerable support from the ANC at the polls - even dethroning it in terms of support in KwaZulu-Natal. After much dilly-dallying from the ANC leadership, Zuma's hearing was postponed until after the elections. The MK Party, through its lawyers, has been pushing for Zuma's disciplinary hearing to be heard at Luthuli House, while the ANC has set in place a virtual hearing due to security concerns. READ | Zuma has given MK council his blessing – Yengeni In a statement, MK Party spokesperson Nhlamulo Ndhlela said: According to Rule 15 of the ANC constitution, [former] president Zuma is entitled to be represented by any fellow member of the ANC if he so chooses. In this regard, and in line with these provisions, [Zuma] will be represented by a long-standing struggle veteran, former ANC NEC member and commander of uMkhonto weSizwe, comrade Tony Yengeni. Ndhlela added that Zuma believes Yengeni is "well-placed" as a former commander in the ANC's erstwhile military wing to represent him "in the kangaroo court convened against him by the sellout ANC of Ramaphosa, [DA leader John] Steenhuisen and [FF Plus leader Pieter] Groenewald". In 2003, Yengeni was convicted of one count of fraud in connection with the Arms Deal after entering into a plea agreement where several corruption charges were dismissed on condition of his pleading guilty to fraud. He was sentenced to four years. Zuma is still fighting his Arms Deal corruption charges in the courts. Ndhlela said by Tuesday night the ANC's disciplinary committee had not responded to a request made by Zuma's legal representatives that the hearing take place physically rather than virtually, as previously agreed between the two parties. When the initial disciplinary hearing was set in early May, the MK Party planned to march to the ANC's headquarters in Johannesburg. Former ANC Chief Whip Tony Yengeni will represent Jacob Zuma at his disciplinary hearing. (Darren Stewart/Gallo Images) Gallo Images The MK Party called off that march, but insists Zuma must appear physically "across the table". ANC secretary-general Fikile Mbalula previously wrote to ANC national disciplinary committee (NDC) chair Ralph Mgijima asking that they hold the hearing at Luthuli House in abeyance, citing "security concerns". The MK Party brands these concerns as "fictitious". After Mbalula's letter, the NDC issued a rephrased "notice of set down", stating that the hearing would still take place on Wednesday at 10:00 on a virtual platform. Acting ANC spokesperson Zuko Godlimpi's phone rang unanswered. Yengeni could not be reached for comment.