The Electoral Court has found that MK Party leaders Visvin Reddy and Bonginkosi Khanyile made comments that incited violence ahead of the elections. They were fined R150 000 each, which was wholly suspended for five years. The court found that they violated Sections 87(1)(a), (b) and (c), and 87(2) of the Electoral Act. The Electoral Court in Bloemfontein has fined firebrand MK Party leaders Visvin Reddy and Bonginkosi Khanyile R150 000 each, wholly suspended for five years, for "inciteful" comments made in the lead-up to the 2024 general elections. This after the Electoral Commission of SA (IEC) asked the court, in documents filed in early May, to sanction them. In a 94-page affidavit, IEC chief electoral officer Sy Mamabolo asked the court to nullify Reddy's parliamentary candidature and fine him R200 000, submitting that he had made the comments in contravention of Sections 87 and 93 of the Electoral Act. He asked the court to impose the same fine on Khanyile, who doesn't appear on MK Party lists. READ | MKP claims IEC, not its leaders, threatens election fairness In a judgment on Thursday, written by Judge Esther Steyn, the court found that Reddy and Khanyile had contravened Sections 87(1)(a), (b) and (c), and 87(2) of the Electoral Act 73 of 1998. "There can be no doubt that, viewed objectively, the statements made by Mr Reddy constitute prohibited conduct in terms of Section 87 of the Act," she wrote. MKP leader Visvin Reddy outside court at a previous appearance. (Soyiso Maliti/News24) News24 The judges found that his comments conveyed serious threats of violence and intimidation, the latter of which was "aimed at citizens not to vote". Moreover, the court found that the threats also interfered with the work of the commission, "especially [its] independence". "The threats were aimed at coercing the commission and its employees from taking any steps that would prohibit MK from campaigning, even if there was a lawful basis to do so." However, the court wasn't persuaded that a transgression of Section 93(2) of the Act had been made. Turning to Khanyile, Steyn wrote: His statements, assessed in the context of when and how they were said, would have been interpreted by a reasonable and informed observer as a threat to prevent the election. He repeatedly stated that if their demands are not met then there will be no election. The court found that the statements both men had made had the "potential to create social unrest and instability in the country". "In the case of Mr Reddy, it has to be borne in mind that he is a candidate of MK and ought to set an example," the judgment read. "His disqualification would promote accountability and send out a message that no one is above the law. The transgressions committed by Mr Reddy, given his position within MK, are serious in nature, and inconsistent with the rule of law. "In my view, the relief sought in relation to the penalties and sanctions of the Act is not only warranted but also appropriate." The judges considered barring Reddy from taking his seat in parliament, but his apology - "albeit very [weak]" - was taken into account. "The conduct of the first and second respondents impacted on a climate of democratic tolerance," the court found. The men were ordered to pay a fine of R150 000 each, which was suspended for five years from Wednesday on condition that: they did not contravene Sections 87(1) or 87(2) of the Electoral Act 73 of 1998 during the period of suspension; and they refrained from making any statements intended to undermine the integrity of any electoral process during the period of suspension. The MK Party's counter-application was dismissed and each party was ordered to pay its own costs. Background When he made the comments in Shallcross, Reddy said there would be violence if the IEC and the courts made unfavourable decisions against former president Jacob Zuma in the lead-up to the general elections. At the time, he said: We are sending a loud and clear message. That is: These courts are sometimes captured. If they stop the MK Party, there will be anarchy in this country. He added: "There will be riots like you have never seen in this country. There will be no election. No South African will go to the polls if the MK Party is not on the ballot." Khanyile, who was also captured on video, made similar comments. "We want a letter from them that says Zuma is eligible. If it means that we must attack them, I will attack them first. I want peace. I want slay queens in Sandton. I will never surrender the revolution in the name of peace. We are winning this election," he said.