MK Party president Jacob Zuma has rejected secretary-general Arthur Zwane's resignation. Zwane had tendered his resignation as the administration head, citing his demanding "business interests". The MK Party said Dr Sifiso Maseko, who had taken over Zwane's role, has been redeployed to "strengthen internal capital" in the party's human resources department. The MK Party says its former secretary-general, Arthur Zwane, is back in its ranks after former president Jacob Zuma rejected his recent resignation. Party spokesperson Nhlamulo Ndhlela said Sifiso Maseko, who had taken over Zwane's role, has been redeployed to the human resources department "to strengthen internal capital". "Given the turbulent times our country is experiencing under the current DANC (DA/ANC) coalition, and with all South Africans looking to the MK Party for leadership, maintaining strong capacity, unity and continuity within our ranks is more important than ever. "The president and secretary-general met recently to finalise the details of comrade Zwane's return to office. Consequently, comrade Arthur Zwane is back at work with immediate effect," Ndhlela said in a statement on Thursday morning. News24 previously reported Zuma showed Zwane the door after allegations of "mismanagement". Zwane, who had replaced Sihle Ngubane, had only been at the helm for two weeks when he was axed. READ | MK Party's two-week special: Zuma fires admin boss amid 'mismanagement' allegations Zwane isn't the party's first secretary-general to be shown the door after allegations of mismanagement. News24 previously reported that Zwane said he had resigned in writing on 1 July the day after allegations of "mismanagement". But back then Zuma had his own version of events, saying he had in fact written a letter of his own to Zwane to say that he was "relinquishing" him as the secretary-general. In a leadership shake-up in late March, the MK Party moved to place the former ANC president's loyalists in top positions. Former police minister Nkosinathi Nhleko joined as a national leader, while then acting secretary-general Thanduxolo "Gorbachev" Dyodo was replaced by Ngubane. The party has also announced that Zuma has appointed Magasela Mzobe as head of the presidency to bolster the office. Mzobe, a former ANC Youth League leader, last year dumped the ANC and joined the EFF. He has now left the EFF for the MK Party. South Africa's first impeached judge, John Hlophe, was also announced as the party's parliamentary leader. He has since been designated to the Judicial Service Commission. The party also embraced controversial former Prasa boss Lucky Montana, former Eskom head Brian Molefe and former SARS commissioner Tom Moyane. READ | 'As big as an elephant': Without proof, Zuma repeats vote-rigging claims as MKP withdraws court bid Ndhlela clarified what transpired when Zwane turned his back on the party. He said after receiving and carefully considering Zwane's resignation letter on 1 July, Zuma "decided not to accept the resignation". Ndhlela explained: The primary reason, among others, is that the MK Party's founding HUVO (strategic workshop) in Bela Bela outlined pivotal tasks essential for preparing us for future challenges, particularly strengthening our organisational structures in anticipation of the upcoming 2026 local government elections and beyond. He said the MK Party looked forward to Zwane's continued contributions to building a strong, vibrant and resilient party, and to Maseko's role in reinforcing the party's HR arm. He added: "As the official opposition party, we face an unprecedented task. Unlike any other official opposition party since 1994, we must, on behalf of the poor and downtrodden, ensure that this unholy and anti-black DANC (DA ANC) coalition is held accountable for its aim to reverse the gains made thus far."